THE CONCLUSION OF A POEM, COMPOSED IN ANTI- 
CIPATION OF LEAVING SCHOOL. 
Dear native regions, I foretell, 
From what I feel at this farewell, 
That, wheresoe'er my steps may tend, 
And whensoe'er my course shall end, 
If in that hour a single tie 
Survive of local sympathy, 
My soul will cast the backward view, 
The longing look alone on you. 
Thus, while the Sun sinks down to rest 
Far in the regions of the west, 
Though to the vale no parting beam 
Be given, not one memorial gleam, 
A lingering light he fondly throws 
On the dear hills where first he rose. 
. 

WRITTEN IN VERY EARLY YOUTH 
Calm is all nature as a resting wheel. 
The kine are couched upon the dewy grass ; 
The horse alone, seen dimly as I pass, 
Is cropping audibly his later meal : 
Dark is the ground ; a slumber seems to steal 
O'er vale, and mountain, and the starless sky. 
Now, in this blank of things, a harmony, 
Home-felt, and home-created, comes to heal 
That grief for which the senses still supply 
Fresh food ; for only then, when memory 
Is hushed, am I at rest. My Friends ! restrain 
Those busy cares that would allay my pain ; 
Oh ! leave me to myself, nor let me feel 
The officious touch that makes me droop again. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

in. 
AN EVENING WALK. 
ADDRESSED TO A YOUNG LADY. 
General Sketch of the Lakes — Author's regret of his youth 
which was passed amongst them — Short description of 
Noon — Cascade — Noon-tide Retreat — Precipice and 
sloping Lights — Face of Nature as the Sun declines — 
Mountain-farm, and the Cock — Slate-quarry — Sunset — 
Superstition of the Country connected with that moment 
— Swans — Female Beggar — Twilight-sounds — Western 
Lights — Spirits — Night — Moonlight — Hope — Night- 
sounds — Conclusion. 
Far from my dearest Friend, 'tis mine to rove 
Through bare grey dell, high wood, and pastoral cove ; 
Where Derwent rests, and listens to the roar 
That stuns the tremulous cliffs of high Lodore ; 
Where peace to Grasmere's lonely island leads, 
To willowy hedge-rows, and to emerald meads ; 
Leads to her bridge, rude church, and cottaged 
grounds, 
Her rocky sheepwalks, and her woodland bounds ; 
Where, undisturbed by winds, Winander sleeps 
'Mid clustering isles, and holly-sprinkled steeps ; 
Where twilight glens endear my Esthwaite's shore, 
And memory of departed pleasures, more. 
Fair scenes, erewhile, I taught, a happy child, 
The echoes of your rocks my carols wild : 
The spirit sought not then, in cherished sadness, 
A cloudy substitute for failing gladness. 
In youth's keen eye the livelong day was bright, 
The sun at morning, and the stars at night, 
Alike, when first the bittern's hollow bill 
Was heard, or woodcocks roamed the moonlight 
hill. 
In thoughtless gaiety I coursed the plain, 
And hope itself was all I knew of pain ; 
For then, the inexperienced heart would beat 
At times, while young Content forsook her seat, 
And wild Impatience, pointing upward, showed, 
Through passes yet unreached, a brighter road. 
Alas ! the idle tale of man is found 
Depicted in the dial's moral round ; 
Hope with reflection blends her social rays 
To gild the total tablet of his days ; 
Yet still, the sport of some malignant power, 
He knows but from its shade the present hour. 

 These lines are only applicable to the middle part of 
that lake. 
 In the beginning of winter, ttiese mountains are fre- 
quented by woodcocks, which in dark nights retire into 
the woods. 

But why, ungrateful, dwell on idle pain ? 
To show what pleasures yet to me remain, 
Say, will my Friend, with unreluctant ear, 
The history of a poet's evening hear ? 
When, in the south, the wan noon, brooding still, 
Breathed a pale steam around the glaring hill, 
And shades of deep-embattled clouds were seen, 
Spotting the northern cliffs with lights between ; 
When crowding cattle, checked by rails that make 
A fence far stretched into the shallow lake, 
Lashed the cool water with their restless tails, 
Or from high points of rock looked out for fanning 
gales ; 
When school-boys stretched their length upon the 
green ; 
And round the broad-spread oak, a glimmering 
scene, 
In the rough fern-clad park, the herded deer 
Shook the still-twinkling tail and glancing ear ; 
When horses in the sunburnt intake stood, 
And vainly eyed below the tempting flood, 
Or tracked the passenger, in mute distress, 
With forward neck the closing gate to press — 
Then, while I wandered where the huddling rill 
Brightens with water-breaks the hollow ghyll \ 
As by enchantment, an obscure retreat 
Opened at once, and stayed my devious feet. 
While thick above the rill the branches close, 
In rocky basin its wild waves repose, 
Inverted shrubs, and moss of gloomy green, 
Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds be- 
. tween ; 
And its own twilight softens the whole scene, 
Save where aloft the subtle sunbeams shine 
On withered briars that o'er the crags recline ; 
Save where, with sparkling foam, a small cascade 
Illumines, from within, the leafy shade ; 
Beyond, along the vista of the brook, 
Where antique roots its bustling course o'erlook, 
The eye reposes on a secret bridge J 
Half grey, half shagged with ivy to its ridge ; 
There, bending o'er the stream, the listless swain 
Lingers behind his disappearing wain. 
— Did Sabine grace adorn my living line, 
Blandusia's praise, wild stream, should yield to 
thine ! 

 The word intake is local, and signifies a mountain- 
inelosure. 
t Ghyll is also, I believe, a term confined to this coun- 
try : ghyll, and dingle, have the same meaning. 
t The reader who has made the tour of this country, will 
recognise, in this description, the features which charac- 
terise the lower waterfall in the grounds of Rydal. 

AN EVENING WALK. 

Never shall ruthless minister of death 
'Mid thy soft glooms the glittering steel unsheath; 
No goblets shall, for thee, be crowned with flowers, 
No kid with piteous outcry thrill thy bowers ; 
The mystic shapes that by thy margin rove 
A more benignant sacrifice approve — 
I A mind, that, in a calm angelic mood 
Of happy wisdom, meditating good, 
Beholds, of all from her high powers required, 
Much done, and much designed, and more desired, — 
Harmonious thoughts, a soul by truth refined, 
Entire affection for all human kind. 
Dear Brook, farewell ! To-morrow's noon again 
Shall hide me, wooing long thy wildwood strain ; 
But now the sun has gained his western road, 
And eve's mild hour invites my steps abroad. 
While, near the midway cliff, the silvered kite 
In many a whistling circle wheels her flight ; 
Slant watery lights, from parting clouds, apace 
Travel along the precipice's base ; 
Cheering its naked waste of scattered stone, 
By lichens grey, and scanty moss, o'ergrown ; 
Where scarce the foxglove peeps, or thistle's beard ; 
And restless stone-chat, all day long, is heard. 
How pleasant, as the sun declines, to view 
The spacious landscape change in form and hue ! 
Here, vanish, as in mist, before a flood 
Of bright obscurity, hill, lawn, and wood ; 
There, objects, by the searching beams betrayed, 
Come forth, and here retire in purple shade ; 
Even the white stems of birch, the cottage white, 
Soften their glare before the mellow fight ; 
The skiffs, at anchor where with umbrage wide 
Yon chestnuts half the latticed boat-house hide, 
Shed from their sides, that face the sun's slant beam, 
Strong flakes of radiance on the tremulous stream : 
Raised by yon travelling flock, a dusty cloud 
Mounts from the road, and spreads its moving 
shroud ; 
The shepherd, all involved in wreaths of fire, 
Now shows a shadowy speck, and now is lost entire. 
Into a gradual calm the breezes sink, 
A blue rim borders all the lake's still brink ; 
There doth the twinkling aspen's foliage sleep, 
And insects clothe, like dust, the glassy deep : 
And now, on every side, the surface breaks 
Into blue spots, and slowly lengthening streaks ; 
Here, plots of sparkling water tremble bright 
With thousand thousand twinkling points of light ; 
There, waves that, hardly weltering, die away, 

Tip their smooth ridges with a softer ray ; 
And now the whole wide lake in deep repose 
Is hushed, and like a burnished mirror glows, 
Save where, along the shady western marge, 
Coasts, with industrious oar, the charcoal barge. 
Then' panniered train a group of potters goad, 
Winding from side to side up the steep road ; 
The peasant, from yon cliff of fearful edge 
Shot, down the headlong path darts with his sledge; 
Bright beams the lonely mountain-horse illume 
Feeding 'mid purple heath, "green lings," and 
broom ; 
While the sharp slope the slackened team confounds, 
Downward the ponderous timber-wain resounds ; 
In foamy breaks the rill, with merry song, 
Dashed o'er the rough rock, lightly leaps along ; 
From lonesome chapel at the mountain's feet, 
Three humble bells their rustic chime repeat ; 
Sounds from the water-side the hammered boat ; 
And Masted quarry thunders, heard remote ! 
Even here, amid the sweep of endless woods, 
Blue pomp of lakes, high cliffs, and falling floods, 
Not undefightful are the simplest charms, 
Found by the grassy door of mountain-farms. 
Sweetly ferociousf, round his native walks, 
Pride of his sister-wives, the monarch stalks ; 
Spur-clad his nervous feet, and firm his tread : 
■tf 
A crest of purple tops the warrior's head. 
Bright sparks Ins black and rolling eye-ball hurls 
Afar, his tail he closes and unfurls ; 
On tiptoe reared, he strains his clarion throat, 
Threatened by faintly-answering farms remote : 
Again with his shrill voice the mountain rings, 
While, flapped with conscious pride, resound Ins 
wings ! 
Where, mixed with graceful birch, the sombrous 
pine 
And yew-tree o'er the silver rocks recline ; 
I love to mark the quarry's moving trains, 
Dwarf panniered steeds, and men, and numerous 
wains : 
How busy all the enormous hive within, 
While Echo dallies with its various din ! 
Some (hear you not their chisels' clinking sound ?) 

 "Vivid rings of green." — greenwood's poem on 
SHOOTING. 
t " Dolcemente feroce." — Tasso. — In this description of 
the cock, I remembered a spirited one of the same anima] 
in L'Agriculture, ou Les Georgiques Francoises, of M. 
Rossuet. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Toil, small as pigmies in the gulf profound ; 
Some, dim between the lofty cliffs descried, 
O'erwalk the slender plank from side to side ; 
These, by the pale-blue rocks that ceaseless ring, 
In airy baskets hanging, work and sing. 
Just where a cloud above the mountain rears 
An edge all flame, the broadening sun appears ; 
A long blue bar its segis orb divides, 
And breaks the spreading of its golden tides ; 
And now that orb has touched the purple steep 
Whose softened image penetrates the deep. 
'Cross the calm lake's blue shades the cliffs aspire, 
With towers and woods, a " prospect all on fire ; " 
While coves and secret hollows, through a ray 
Of fainter gold, a purple gleam betray. 
Each slip of lawn the broken rocks between 
Shines in the light with more than earthly green : 
Deep yellow beams the scattered stems illume, 
Far in the level forest's central gloom : 
Waving his hat, the shepherd, from the vale, 
Directs his winding dog the cliffs to scale, — 
The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks, 
Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted 
flocks. 
Where oaks o'erhang the road the radiance shoots 
On tawny earth, wild weeds, and twisted roots ; 
The druid-stones a brightened ring unfold ; 
And all the babbling brooks are liquid gold ; 
Sunk to a curve, the day-star lessens still, 
Gives one bright glance, and drops behind the hill . 
In these secluded vales, if village fame, 
Confirmed by hoary hairs, belief may claim ; 
When up"the hills, as now, retired the light, 
Strange apparitions mocked the shepherd's sight. 
The form appears of one that spurs his steed 
Midway along the hill with desperate speed ; 
Unhurt pursues his lengthened flight, while all 
Attend, at every stretch, his headlong fall. 
Anon, appears a brave, a gorgeous show 
Of horsemen-shadows moving to and fro ; 
At intervals imperial banners stream, 
And now the van reflects the solar beam ; 
The rear through iron brown betrays a sullen gleam. 
While silent stands the admiring crowd below, 
Silent the visionary warriors go, 
Winding in ordered pomp their upward way •) 
Till the last banner of the long array 

 From Thomson. 
' f See a description of an appearance of this kind in 
Clark's Survey of the Lakes, accompanied by vouchers of 
its veracity, that may amuse the reader. 

Has disappeared, and every trace is fled 
Of splendor — save the beacon's spiry head 
Tipt with eve's latest gleam of burning red. 
Now, while the solemn evening shadows sail, 
On slowly-waving pinions, down the vale ; 
And, fronting the bright west, yon oak entwines, 
Its darkening boughs and leaves, in stronger lines ; 
'Tis pleasant near the tranquil lake to stray 
Where, winding on along some secret bay, 
The swan uplifts his chest, and backward flings 
His neck, a varying arch, between his towering 
wings : 
The eye that marks the gliding creature sees 
How graceful, pride can be, and how majestic, ease. 
While tender cares and mild domestic loves 
With furtive watch pursue her as she moves. 
The female with a meeker charm succeeds, 
And her brown little-ones around her leads, 
Nibbling the water lilies as they pass, 
Or playing wanton with the floating grass. 
She, in a mother's care, her beauty's pride 
Forgetting, calls the wearied to her side ; 
Alternately they mount her back, and rest 
Close by her mantling wings' embraces prest. 
Long may they float upon this flood serene ; 
Theirs be these holms untrodden, still, and green, 
Where leafy shades fence off the blustering gale, 
And breathes in peace the lily of the vale ! 
Yon isle, which feels not even the milk-maid's feet, 
Yet hears her song, " by distance made more sweet," 
Yon isle conceals their home, their hut-like bower ; 
Green water-rushes overspread the floor ; 
Long grass and willows form the woven wall, 
And swings above the roof the poplar tall. 
Thence issuing often with unwieldy stalk, 
They crush with brpad black feet then' flowery 
walk ; 
Or, from the neighbouring water, hear at mom 
The hound, the horse's tread, and mellow horn ; 
Involve their serpent-necks in changeful rings, 
Rolled wantonly between their slippery wings, 
Or, starting up with noise and rude delight, 
Force half upon the wave their cumbrous flight. 
Fair Swan ! by all a mother's joys caressed, 
Haply some wretch has eyed, and called thee 
blessed ; 
When with her infants, from some shady seat 
By the lake's edge, she rose — to face the noontide 
heat ; 
Or taught their limbs along the dusty road 
A few short steps to totter with their load. 

AN EVENING WALK. 

I see her now, denied to lay her head, 
On cold blue nights, in hut or straw-built shed, 
Turn to a silent smile their sleepy cry, 
By pointing to the gliding moon on high. 
— When low-hung clouds each star of summer hide, 
And fireless are the vallies far and wide, 
Where the brook brawls along the public road 
Dark with bat-haunted ashes stretching broad, 
Oft has she taught them on her lap to lay 
The shining glow-worm ; or, in heedless play, 
Toss it from hand to hand, disquieted ; 
While others, not unseen, are free to shed 
Green unmolested light upon their mossy bed. 
Oh ! when the sleety showers her path assail, 
And like a torrent roars the headstrong gale ; 
No more her breath can thaw their fingers cold, 
Their frozen arms her neck no more can fold ; 
Weak roof a cowering form two babes to shield, 
And faint the fire a dying heart can yield ! 
Press the sad kiss, fond mother ! vainly fears 
Thy flooded cheek to wet them with its tears ; 
No tears can chill them, and no bosom warms, 
Thy breast their death-bed, coffined in thine arms ! 
Sweet are the sounds that mingle from afar, 
Heard by calm lakes, as peeps the folding star, 
Where the duck dabbles 'mid the rustling sedge, 
And feeding pike starts from the water's edge, 
Or the swan stirs the reeds, Ins neck and bill 
Wetting, that drip upon the water still ; 
And heron, as resounds the trodden shore, 
Shoots upward, darting his long neck before. 
Now, with religious awe, the farewell light 
Blends with the solemn colouring of night ; 
'Mid groves of clouds that crest the mountain's brow, 
And round the west's proud lodge their shadows 
throw, 
Like Una shining on her gloomy way, 
The half-seen form of Twilight roams astray ; 
Shedding, through paly loop-holes mild and small, 
Gleams that upon the lake's still bosom fall ; 
Soft o'er the surface creep those lustres pale 
Tracking the motions of the fitful gale. 
With restless interchange at once the bright 
Wins on the shade, the shade upon the light. 
No favoured eye was e'er allowed to gaze 
On lovelier spectacle in faery days ; 
When gentle Spirits urged a sportive chase, 
Brushing with lucid wands the water's face ; 
While music, stealing round the glimmering deeps, 
Charmed the tall circle of the enchanted steeps. 
— The lights are vanished from the watery plains : 

No wreck of all the pageantry remains. 
Unheeded night has overcome the vales : 
On the dark earth the wearied vision fails ; 
The latest lingerer of the forest train, 
The lone black fir, forsakes the faded plain ; 
Last evening sight, the cottage smoke, no more, 
Lost in the thickened darkness, glimmers hoar ; 
And, towering from the sullen dark-brown mere, 
Like a black wall, the mountain-steeps appear. 
— Now o'er the soothed accordant heart we feel 
A sympathetic twilight slowly steal, 
And ever, as we fondly muse, we find 
The soft gloom deepening on the tranquil mind. 
Stay ! pensive, sadly-pleasing visions, stay ! 
Ah no ! as fades the vale, they fade away : 
Yet still the tender, vacant gloom remains ; 
Still the cold cheek its shuddering tear retains. 
The bird, who ceased, with fading light, to thread 
Silent the hedge or steamy rivulet's bed, 
From his grey re-appearing tower shall soon 
Salute with gladsome note the rising moon, 
While with a hoary fight she frosts the ground, 
And pours a deeper blue to ^Ether's bound ; 
Pleased, as she moves, her pomp of clouds to fold 
In robes of azure, fleecy -white, and gold. 
Above yon eastern hill, where darkness broods 
O'er all its vanished dells, and lawns, and woods ; 
Where but a mass of shade the sight can trace, 
Even now she shews, half-veiled, her lovely face : 
Across the gloomy valley flings her light, 
Far to the western slopes with hamlets white ; 
And gives, where woods the chequered upland strew, 
To the green com of summer, autumn's hue. 
Thus Hope, first pouring from her blessed horn 
Her dawn, far lovelier than the moon's own 
morn, 
'Till higher mounted, strives in vain to cheer 
The weary hil!s, impervious, blackening near ; 
Yet does she still, undaunted, throw the while 
On darling spots remote her tempting smile. 
Even now she decks for me a distant scene, 
(For dark and broad the gulf of time between) 
Gilding that cottage with her fondest ray, 
(Sole bourn, sole wish, sole object of my way ; 
How fan.' its lawns and sheltering woods appear ! 
How sweet its streamlet murmurs in mine ear !) 
Where we, my Friend, to happy days shall rise, 
'Till our small share of hardly-paining sighs 
(For sighs will ever trouble human breath) 
Creep hushed into the tranquil breast of death. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

But now the clear bright Moon her zenith gains, 
And, rimy without speck, extend the plains : 
The deepest cleft the mountain's front displays 
Scarce hides a shadow from her searching rays ; 
From the dark-blue faint silvery threads divide 
The hflls, while gleams below the azure tide ; 
Time softly treads ; throughout the landscape 
breathes 
A peace enlivened, not disturbed, by wreaths 
Of charcoal-smoke, that o'er the fallen wood, 
Steal down the hill, and spread along the flood. 
The song of mountain-streams, unheard by day, 
Now hardly heard, beguiles my homeward way. 
Ah' listens, like the sleeping water, still, 
To catch the spiritual music of the hill, 
Broke only by the slow clock tolling deep, 
Or shout that wakes the ferry-man from sleep, 
The echoed hoof nearing the distant shore, 
The boat's first motion — made with dashing oar : 
Sound of closed gate, across the water borne, 
Hurrying the timid hare through rustling corn ; 
The sportive outcry of the mocking owl ; 
And at long intervals the mill-dog's howl ; 
The distant forge's swinging thump profound ; 
Or yell, in the deep woods, of lonely hound. 
, , & . 

LINES 
WRITTEN WHTLE SAILING IN A BOAT AT EVENING. 
How richly glows the water's breast 
Before us, tinged with evening hues, 
While, facing thus the crimson west, 
The boat her silent course pursues ! 
And see how dark the backward stream ! 
A little moment past so smiling ! 
And still, perhaps, with faithless gleam, 
Some other loiterers beguiling. 
Such views the youthful Bard allure ; 
But, heedless of the following gloom, 
He deems their colours shall endure 
Till peace go with him to the tomb. 
— And let him nurse his fond deceit, 
And what if he must die in sorrow ! 
Who would not cherish dreams so sweet, 
Though grief and pain may come to-morrow I 

. 

REMEMBRANCE OF COLLINS, 
COMPOSED UPON THE THAMES NEAR RICHMOND. 
Glide gently, thus for ever glide, 
Thames ! that other bards may see 
As lovely visions by thy side 
As now, fair river ! come to me. 
glide, fair stream ! for ever so, 
Thy quiet soul on all bestowing, 
Till all our minds for ever flow 
As thy deep waters now are flowing. 
Vain thought ! — Yet be as now thou art, 
That in thy waters may be seen 
The image of a poet's heart, 
How bright, how solemn, how serene ! 
Such as did once the Poet bless, 
Who murmuring here a later ditty, 
Could find no refuge from distress 
But in the milder grief of pity. 
Now let us, as we float along, 
For Mm suspend the dashing oar ; 
And pray that never child of song 
May know that Poet's sorrows more. 
How calm ! how still ! the only sound, 
The dripping of the oar suspended ! 
— The evening darkness gathers round 
By virtue's holiest Powers attended. 

. 

VI. 
DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES 
TAKEN 
DURING A PEDESTRIAN TOUR AMONG THE ALPS. 

TO 
THE REV. ROBERT JONES, 
FELLOW OF ST. JOHIl's COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE. 
Dear Sib, 
However desirous I might have been of giving 
you proofs of the high place you hold in my esteem, I 
should have been cautious of wounding your delicacy by 
thus publicly addressing you, had not the circumstance of 
our having been companions among the Alps, seemed to 
give this dedication a propriety sufficient to do away any 
scruples which your modesty might otherwise have 
suggested. 

 Collins's Ode on the death of Thomson, the last writ- 
ten, I believe, of the poems which were published during 
his life-time. This Ode is also alluded to in the next stanza. 

DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES, &c. 

In inscribing thislittle work to you, I consult my heart. 
You know well how great is the difference between two 
companions lolling in a post-chaise, and two travellers 
plodding slowly along the road, side by side, each with 
his little knapsack of necessaries upon his shoulders. How 
much more of heart between the two latter ! 
I am happy in being conscious that I shall have one 
reader who will approach the conclusion of thesefew pages 
with regret. You they must certainly interest, in remind- 
ing you of moments to which you can hardly look back 
without a pleasure not the less dear from a shade of me- 
lancholy. You will meet with few images without recol- 
lecting the spot where we observed them together ; 
consequently, whatever is feeble in my design, or spiritless 
in my colouring, will be amply supplied by your own 
memory. 
With still greater propriety I might have inscribed to 
you a description of some of the features of your native 
mountains, through which we have wandered together, in 
the same manner, with so much pleasure. But the sea- 
sunsets, which give such splendour to the vale of Chvyd, 
Snowdon, the chair of Idris, the quiet village of Bethgelert, 
Menai and her Druids, the Alpine steeps of the Conway, 
and the still more interesting windings of the wizard stream 
of the Dee, remain yet untouched. Apprehensive that 
my pencil may never be exercised on these subjects, I 
cannot let slip this opportunity of thus publicly assuring 
you with how much affection and esteem 
I am, dear Sir, 
Most sincerely yours, 
W. WORDSWORTH. 
London, . 

Happiness (if she had been to be found on earth) among 
the charms of Nature — Pleasures of the pedestrian 
Traveller — Author crosses France to the Alps — Present 
state of the Grande Chartreuse— Lake of Como — Time, 
Sunset — Same Scwe, Twilight — Same Scene, Morning ; 
it voluptuous Character ; Old man and forest-cottage 
music — River Tusa — Via Mala and Grison Gipsy — 
Sckellenen-thal — Lake of Uri — Stormy sunset — Chapel 
of William Tell — Force of local emotion — Chamois- 
chaser — View of the higher Alps — manner of life of a 
Swiss mountaineer, interspersed with views of the higher 
Alps — Golden age of the Alps — Life and views continued 
— Ranz des Vaches, famous Swiss Air — Abbey of Einsied- 
len and its pilgrims — Valley of Chamouny — Mont Blanc 
— Slavery of Savoy — Influence of liberty on cottage-happi- 
ness — France — Wish for the Extirpation of slavery — 
Conclusion. 
Were there, below, a spot of holy ground 
Where from distress a refuge might be found, 
And solitude prepare the soul for heaven ; 
Sure, nature's God that spot to man had given 
Where falls the purple morning far and wide 
In flakes of light upon the mountain side ; 
Where with loud voice the power of water shakes 
The leafy wood, or sleeps in quiet lakes. 
Yet not unrecompensed the man shall roam, 
Who at the call of summer quits his home, 

And plods through some wide realm o'er vale and 
height, 
Though seeking only holiday delight ; 
At least, not owning to himself an aim 
To which the sage would give a prouder name. 
No gains too cheaply earned his fancy cloy, 
Though every passing zephyr whispers joy ; 
Brisk toil, alternating with ready ease, 
Feeds the clear current of his sympathies. 
For him sod-seats the cottage-door adorn ; 
And peeps the far-off spire, his evening bourn ! 
Dear is the forest frowning o'er his head, 
And dear the velvet green-sward to his tread : 
Moves there a cloud o'er mid-day's flaming eye I 
Upward he looks — " and calls it luxury :" 
Kind Nature's charities his steps attend ; 
In every babbling brook he finds a friend ; 
While chastening thoughts of sweetest use,bestowed 
By wisdom, moralise his pensive road. 
Host of his welcome inn, the noon-tide bower, 
To his spare meal he calls the passing poor ; 
He views the sun uplift his golden fire, 
Or sink, with heart alive like Memnon's lyre ; 
Blesses the moon that comes with kindly ray, 
To fight him shaken by his rugged way. 
Back from his sight no bashful children steal ; 
He sits a brother at the cottage-meal ; 
His humble looks no shy restraint impart ; 
Around him plays at will the virgin heart. 
While unsuspended wheels the village dance, 
The maidens eye him with enquiring glance, 
Much wondering by what fit of crazing care, 
Or desperate love, bewildered, he came there. 
A hope, that prudence could not then approve, 
That clung to Nature with a truant's love, 
O'er Gallia's wastes of corn my footsteps led ; 
Her files of road-elms, high above my head 
In long-drawn vista, rustling in the breeze ; 
Or where her pathways straggle as they please 
By lonely farms and secret villages. 
But lo ! the Alps ascending white in air, 
Toy with the sun and glitter from afar. 
And now, emerging from the forest's gloom, 
I greet thee, Chartreuse, while I mourn thy doom. 
Whither is fled that Power whose frown severe 
Awed sober Reason till she crouched in fear ? 
That Silence, once in deathlike fetters bound, 
Chains that were loosened only by the sound 
Of holv rites chanted in measured round % 

 The lyre of Memnon is reported to have emitted 
melancholy or cheerful tones, as it was touched by the 
sun's evening or morning rays. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

— The voice of blasphemy the fane alarms, 
The cloister startles at the gleam of arms. 
The thundering tube the aged angler hears, 
Bent o'er the groaning flood that sweeps away his 
tears. 
Cloud-piercing pine-trees nod their troubled heads, 
Spires, rocks, and lawns a browner night o'er- 
spreads ; 
Strong terror checks the female peasant's sighs, 
And start the astonished shades at female eyes. 
From Bruno's forest screams the affrighted jay, 
And slow the insulted eagle wheels away. 
A viewless flight of laughing Demons mock 
The Cross, by angels planted on the aerial rock. 
The "parting Genius " sighs with hollow breath 
Along the mystic streams of Life and Death . 
Swelling the outcry dull, that long resounds 
Portentous through her old woods' trackless 
bounds, 
Vallombre J, 'mid her falling fanes, deplores, 
For ever broke, the sabbath of her bowers. 
More pleased, my foot the hidden margin roves 
Of Como, bosomed deep in chestnut groves. 
No meadows thrown between, the giddy steeps 
Tower, bare or sylvan, from the narrow deeps. 
— To towns, whose shades of no rude noise com- 
plain, 
From ringing team apart and grating wain — 
To flat-roofed towns, that touch the water's bound, 
Or lurk in woody sunless glens profound, 
Or, from the bending rocks, obtrusive cling, 
And o'er the whitened wave their shadows fling — 
The pathway leads, as round the steeps it twines ; 
And Silence loves its purple roof of vines. 
The loitering traveller hence, at evening, sees 
From rock-hewn steps the sail between the trees ; 
Or marks, 'mid opening cliffs, fair dark-eyed maids 
Tend the small harvest of then garden glades ; 
Or stops the solemn mountain-shades to view 
Stretch o'er the pictured mirror broad and blue, 
And track the yellow lights from steep to steep, 
As up the opposing hills they slowly creep. 
Aloft, here, half a village shines, arrayed 
In golden light ; half hides itself in shade : 
While, from amid the darkened roofs, the spire, 
Restlessly flashing, seems to mount like fire : 
There, all unshaded, blazing forests throw 
Rich golden verdure on the lake below. 

 Alluding to crosses seen on the tops of the spiry rocks 
of Chartreuse, which have every appearance of being 
inaccessible. 
f Names of rivers at the Chartreuse. 
t Name of one of the valleys of the Chartreuse. 

Slow glides the sail along the illumined shore, 
And steals into the shade the lazy oar ; 
Soft bosoms breathe around contagious sighs,. 
And amorous music on the water dies. 
How blest, delicious scene ! the eye that greets 
Thy open beauties, or thy lone retreats ; 
Beholds the unwearied sweep of wood that scales 
Thy cliffs ; the endless waters of thy vales ; 
Thy lowly cots that sprinkle all the shore, 
Each with its household boat beside the door ; 
Thy torrents shooting from the clear-blue sky ; 
Thy towns, that cleave, like swallows' nests, on 
high ; 
That glimmer hoar in eve's last light, descried 
Dim from the twilight water's shaggy side, 
Whence lutes and voices down the enchanted 
woods 
Steal, and compose the oar-forgotten floods ; 
— Thy lake, that, streaked or dappled, blue or 
grey, 
'Mid smoking woods gleams hid from morning's ray 
Slow- travelling down the western hills, to' enfold 
Its green-tinged margin in a blaze of gold ; 
Thy glittering steeples, whence the matin bell 
Calls forth the woodman from his desert cell, 
And quickens the blithe sound of oars that pass 
Along the steaming lake, to early mass. 
But now farewell to each and all — adieu 
To every charm, and last and chief to you, 
Ye lovely maidens that hi noontide shade 
Rest near your little plots of wheaten glade ; 
To all that binds the soul in powerless trance, 
Lip-dewing song, and ringlet-tossing dance ; 
Where sparkling eyes and breaking smiles illume 
The sylvan cabin's lute-enlivened gloom. 
— Alas ! the very murmur of the streams 
Breathes o'er the failing soul voluptuous dreams, 
While Slavery, forcing the sunk mind to dwell 
On joys that might disgrace the captive's cell, 
Her shameless timbrel shakes on Como's marge, 
And lures from bay to bay the vocal barge. 
Yet are thy softer arts with power indued 
To soothe and cheer the poor man's solitude. 
By silent cottage-doors, the peasant's home 
Left vacant for the day, I loved to roam. 
But once I pierced the mazes of a wood 
In which a cabin undeserted stood ; 
There an old man an olden measure scanned 
On a rude viol touched with withered hand. 
As lambs or fawns m April clustering lie 
Under a hoary oak's thin canopy, 
Stretched at his feet, with stedfast upward eye, 

DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES, &c. 

His children's children listened to the sound ; 
— A Hermit with his family around ! 
But let us hence ; for fair Locarno smiles 
Embowered in walnut slopes and citron isles : 
Or seek at eve the banks of Tusa's stream, 
Where, 'mid dim towers and woods, her waters 
gleam. 
From the bright wave, in solemn gloom, retire 
The dull-red steeps, and, darkening still, aspire 
To where afar rich orange lustres glow 
Round undistinguished clouds, and rocks, and 
snow : 
Or, led where Via MaJa's chasms confine 
The indignant waters of the infant Rhine, 
Hang o'er the abyss, whose else impervious gloom 
His burning eyes with fearful light illume. 
The mind condemned, without reprieve, to go 
O'er life's long deserts with its charge of woe, 
With sad congratulation joins the train 
Where beasts and men together o'er the plain 
Move on— a mighty caravan of pain : 
Hope, strength, and courage, social suffering 
brings, 
Freshening (.he wilderness with shades and springs. 
— There be whose lot far otherwise is cast : 
Sole human tenant of the piny waste, 
By choice or doom a gipsy wanders here, 
A nursling babe her only comforter ; 
Lo, where she sits beneath yon shaggy rock, 
A cowering shape half hid in curling smoke ! 
When lightning among clouds and mountain- 
snows 
Predominates, and darkness comes and goes, 
And the fierce torrent, at the flashes broad 
Starts, like a horse, beside the glaring road — 
She seeks a covert from the battering shower 
In the roofed bridge f ; the bridge, in that dread 
hour, 
Itself all trembling at the torrent's power. 
Nor is she more at ease on some still night, 
When not a star supplies the comfort of its light ; 
Only the waning moon hangs dull and red 
Above a melancholy mountain's head, 
Then sets. In total gloom the Vagrant sighs, 
Stoops her sick head, and shuts her weary eyes ; 
 The river along whose banks you descend in crossing 
the Alps by the Simplon Pass. 
t Most of the bridges among the Alps are of wood, and 
covered : these bridges have a heavy appearance, and 
rather injure the effect of the scenery in some places. 

Or on her fingers counts the distant clock, 
Or, to the drowsy crow of midnight cock, 
Listens, or quakes while from the forest's gulf 
Howls near and nearer yet the famished wolf. 
From the green vale of Urseren smooth and wide 
Descend we now, the maddened Reuss our guide ; 
By rocks that, shutting out the blessed day, 
Cling tremblingly to rocks as loose as they ; 
By cells upon whose image, while he prays, 
The kneeling peasant scarcely dares to gaze ; 
By many a votive death-cross -(- planted near, 
And watered duly with the pious tear, 
That faded silent from the upward eye 
Unmoved with each rude form of peril nigh ; 
Fixed on the anchor left by Him who saves 
Alike in whelming snows, and roaring waves. 
But soon a peopled region on the sight 
Opens — a little world of calm delight ; 
Where mists, suspended on the expiring gale, 
Spread rooflike o'er the deep secluded vale, 
And beams of evening slipping in between, 
Gently illuminate a sober scene : — 
Here, on the brown wood-cottages J they sleep, 
There, over rock or sloping pasture creep. 
On as we journey, in clear view displayed, 
The still vale lengthens underneath its shade 
Of low-hung vapour : on the freshened mead 
The green light sparkles ; — the dim bowers recede. 
While pastoral pipes and streams the landscape lull, 
And bells of passing mules that tinkle dull, 
In solemn shapes before the admiring eye 
Dilated hang the misty pines on high, 
Huge convent domes with pinnacles and towers, 
And antique castles seen through gleamy showers. 
From such romantic dreams, my soul, awake ! 
To sterner pleasure, where, by Uri's lake 
In Nature's pristine majesty outspread, 
Winds neither road nor path for foot to tread : 
The rocks rise naked as a wall, or stretch, 
Far o'er the water, hung with groves of beech ; 
Aerial pines from loftier steeps ascend, 
Nor stop but where creation seems to end. 
Yet here and there, if mid the savage scene 
Appears a scanty plot of smiling green, 

 The Catholic religion prevails here : these cells are, as 
is well known, very common in the Catholic countries, 
planted, like the Roman tombs, along the road side. 
f Crosses, commemorative of the deaths of travellers 
by the fall of snow, and other accidents, are very common 
along this dreadful road. 
% The houses in the more retired Swiss valleys are all 
built of wood. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Up from the lake a zigzag path will creep 
To reach a small wood-hut hung boldly on the steep. 
— Before those thresholds (never can they know 
The face of traveller passing to and fro,) 
No peasant leans upon his pole, to tell 
For whom at morning tolled the funeral bell ; 
Their watch-dog ne'er his angry bark foregoes, 
Touched by the beggar's moan of human woes ; 
The shady porch ne'er offered a cool seat 
To pilgrims overcome by summer's heat. 
Yet thither the world's business finds its way 
At times, and tales unsought beguile the day, 
And there are those fond thoughts which Solitude, 
However stern, is powerless to exclude. 
There doth the maiden watch her lover's sail 
Approaching, and upbraid the tardy gale ; 
At midnight listens till his parting oar, 
And its last echo, can be heard no more. 
And what if ospreys, cormorants, herons cry, 
Amid tempestuous vapours driving by, 
Or hovering over wastes too bleak to rear 
That common growth of earth, the foodful ear ; 
Where the green apple shrivels on the spray, 
And pines the unripened pear in summer's kindliest 
ray; 
Contentment shares the desolate domain 
With Independence, child of high Disdain. 
Exulting 'mid the winter of the skies, 
Shy as the jealous chamois, Freedom flies, 
And grasps by fits her sword, and often eyes ; 
And sometimes, as from rock to rock she bounds 
The Patriot nymph starts at imagined sounds, 
And, wildly pausing, oft she hangs aghast, 
Whether some old Swiss air hath checked her haste 
Or thrill of Spartan fife is caught between the blast. 
Swoln with incessant rains from hour to hour, 
All day the floods a deepening murmur pour : 
The sky is veiled, and every cheerful sight : 
Dark is the region as with coming night ; 
But what a sudden burst of overpowering light ! 
Triumphant on the bosom of the storm, 
Glances the wheeling eagle's glorious form ! 
Eastward, in long perspective glittering, shine 
The wood-crowned cliffs that o'er the lake recline ; 
Those lofty cliffs a hundred streams unfold, 
At once to pillars turned that flame with gold : 
Behind his sail the peasant shrinks, to shim 
The west, that burns like one dilated sun, 
A crucible of mighty compass, felt 
By mountains, glowing till they seem to melt. 
But, lo ! the boatman, overawed, before 
The pictured fane of Tell suspends his oar ; 

Confused the Marathonian tale appears, 
While his eyes sparkle with heroic tears. 
And who, that walks where men of ancient days 
Have wrought with godlike arm the deeds of praise 
Feels not the spirit of the place control, 
Or rouse and agitate his labouring soul ? 
Say, who, by thinking on Canadian hills, 
Or wild Aosta lulled by Alpine rills, 
On Zutphen's plain ; or on that highland dell, 
Through which rough Garry cleaves his way, can tell 
What high resolves exalt the tenderest thought 
Of him whom passion rivets to the spot, 
Where breathed the gale that caught Wolfe's hap- 
piest sigh, 
And the last sunbeam fell on Bayard's eye ; 
Where bleeding Sidney from the cup retired, 
And glad Dundee in "faint huzzas " expired ? 
But now with other mind I stand alone 
Upon the summit of this naked cone, 
And watch the fearless chamois-hunter chase 
His prey, through tracts abrupt of desolate space, 
 Through vacant worlds where Nature never gave 
A brook to murmur or a bough to wave, 
Which unsubstantial Phantoms sacred keep ; 
Thro' worlds where Life, and Voice, and Motion 
sleep ; 
Where silent Hours then' death-like sway extend, 
Save when the avalanche breaks loose, to rend 
Its way with uproar, till the ruin, drowned 
In some dense wood or gulf of snow profound, 
Mocks the dull ear of Time with deaf abortive 
sound. 
— 'Tis his, while wandering on from height to 
height, 
To see a planet's pomp and steady light 
In the least star of scarce-appearing night ; 
While the pale moon moves near him, on the bound 
Of ether, shining with diminished round, 
And far and wide the icy summits blaze, 
Rejoicing in the glory of her rays : 
To him the day-star glitters small and bright, 
Shorn of its beams, insufferably white, 
And he can look beyond the sun, and view 
Those fast-receding depths of sable blue 
Flying till vision can no more pursue ! 
— At once bewildering mists around him close, 
And cold and hunger are his least of woes ; 
The Demon of the snow, with angry roar 
Descending, shuts for aye his prison door. 
Soon with despair's whole weight his spirits sink ; 

 For most of the images in the next sixteen verses, I 
am indebted to M. Raymond's interesting observations 
annexed to his translation of Coxe's Tour in Switzerland. 

DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES, &c. 

 

Bread has he none, the snow must be his drink ; 
And, ere his eyes can close upon the day, 
The eagle of the Alps o'ershades her prey. 
Now couch thyself where, heard with fear afar, 
Thunders through echoing pines the headlong Aar ; 
Or rather stay to taste the mild delights 
Of pensive Underwalden's pastoral heights. 
— Is there who 'mid these awful wilds has seen 
The native Genii walk the mountain green % 
Or heard, while other worlds their charms reveal, 
Soft music o'er the aerial summit steal ? 
While o'er the desert, answering every close, 
Rich steam of sweetest perfume comes and goes. 
— And sure there is a secret Power that reigns 
Here, where no trace of man the spot profanes, 
Nought but the chalets^, flat and bare, on high 
Suspended 'mid the quiet of the sky ; 
Or distant herds that pasturing upward creep, 
And, not untended, climb the dangerous steep. 
How still ! no irreligious sound or sight 
Rouses the soul from her severe delight. 
An idle voice the sabbath region fills 
Of Deep that calls to Deep across the hills, 
And with that voice accords the soothing sound 
Of drowsy bells, for ever tinkling round ; 
Faint wail of eagle melting into blue 
Beneath the cliffs, and pine-woods' steady sughX; 
The solitary heifer's deepened low ; 
Or rumbling, heard remote, of falling snow. 
All motions, sounds, and voices, far and nigh, 
Blend in a music of tranquillity ; 
Save when, a stranger seen below, the boy 
Shouts from the echoing hills with savage joy. 
When, from the sunny breast of open seas, 
And bays with myrtle fringed, the southern breeze 
Comes on to gladden April with the sight 
Of green isles widening on each snow-clad height : 
When shouts and lowing herds the valley fill, 
And louder torrents stun the noon-tide hill, 
The pastoral Swiss begin the cliffs to scale, 
Leaving to silence the deserted vale ; 
And like the Patriarchs in their simple age 
Move, as the verdure leads, from stage to stage ; 
High and more high in summer's heat they go, 

 The people of this Canton are supposed to be of a more 
melancholy disposition than the other inhabitants of the 
Alps ; this, if true, may proceed from their living more 
secluded. 
t This picture is from the middle region of the Alps. 
Chalets are summer huts for the Swiss herdsmen. 
t Sugh, a Scotch word expressive of the sound of the 
wind through the trees. 

And hear the rattling thunder far below ; 
Or steal beneath the mountains, half-deterred, 
Where huge rocks tremble to the bellowing herd. 
One I behold who, 'cross the foaming flood, 
Leaps with a bound of graceful hardihood ; 
Another high on that green ledge ; — he gained 
The tempting spot with every sinew strained ; 
And downward thence a knot of grass he throws, 
Foo<? .ur his beasts in time of winter snows. 
— Far different fife from what Tradition hoar 
Transmits of happier lot in times of yore ! 
Then Summer lingered long ; and honey flowed 
From out the rocks, the wild bees' safe abode : 
Continual waters welling cheered the waste, 
And plants were wholesome, now of deadly taste : 
Nor Winter yet his frozen stores had piled, 
Usurping where the fairest herbage smiled : 
Nor Hunger driven the herds from pastures bare, 
To climb the treacherous cliffs for scanty fare. 
Then the milk-thistle flourished through the land, 
And forced the full-swoln udder to demand, 
Thrice every day, the pail and welcome hand. 
Thus does the father to his children tell 
Of banished bliss, by fancy loved too well. 
Alas ! that human guilt provoked the rod 
Of angry Nature to avenge her God. 
Still, Nature, ever just, to liim imparts 
Joys only given to uncorrupted hearts. 
'Tis morn : with gold the verdant mountain 
glows ; 
More high, the snowy peaks with hues of rose. 
Far-stietched beneath the many-tinted hills, 
A mighty waste of mist the valley fills, 
A solemn sea ! whose billows wide around 
Stand motionless, to awful silence bound : 
Pines, on the coast, through mist then.' tops uprear, 
That like to leaning masts of stranded ships appear. 
A single chasm, a gulf of gloomy blue, 
Gapes in the centre of the sea — and through 
That dark mysterious gulf ascending, sound 
Innumerable streams with roar profound. 
Mount through the nearer vapours notes of birds, 
And merry flageolet ; the low of herds, 
The bark of dogs, the heifer's tinkling bell, 
Talk, laughter, and perchance a church-tower knell : 
Think not, the peasant from aloft has gazed 
And heard with heart unmoved, with soul unraised : 
Nor is his spirit less enrapt, nor less 
Alive to independent happiness, 
Then, when he lies, out-stretched, at even-tide 
Upon the fragrant mountain's purple side : 
For as the pleasures of his simple day 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Beyond his native valley seldom stray, 
Nought round its darling precincts can he find 
But hrings some past enjoyment to his mind ; 
While Hope, reclining upon Pleasure's urn, 
Binds her wild wreaths, and whispers his return. 
Once, Man entirely free, alone and wild, 
Was West as free — for he was Nature's child. 
He, all superior hut his God disdained, 
Walked none restraining, and by none restrained: 
Confessed no law but what his reason taught, 
Did all he wished, and wished but what he ought. 
As man in his primeval dower arrayed 
The image of his glorious Sire displayed, 
Even so, by faithful Nature guarded, here 
The traces of primeval Man appear ; 
The simple dignity no forms debase ; 
The eye sublime, and surly lion-grace : 
The slave of none, of beasts alone the lord, 
His book he prizes, nor neglects his sword ; 
— Well taught by that to feel his rights, prepared 
With this "the blessings he enjoys to guard." 
And, as his native hills encircle ground 
For many a marvellous victory renowned, 
The work of Freedom daring to oppose, 
With few in arms , innumerable foes, 
When to those famous fields his steps are led, 
An unknown power connects him with the dead : 
For images of other worlds are there ; 
Awful the light, and holy is the air. 
Fitfully, and in flashes, through his soul, 
Like sun-lit tempests, troubled transports roll ; 
His bosom heaves, his Spirit towers amain, 
Beyond the senses and their little reign. 
And oft, when that dread vision hath past by, 
He holds with God himself communion high, 
There where the peal of swelling torrents fills 
The sky-roofed temple of the eternal hills ; 
Or, when upon the mountain's silent brow 
Reclined, he sees, above him and below, 
Bright stars of ice and azure fields of snow ; 
While needle peaks of granite shooting bare 
Tremble in ever- varying tints of air. 

 Alluding to several battles which the Swiss in very 
small numbers have gained over their oppressors, the 
house of Austria ; and, in particular, to one fought at 
Naeffels near Glarus, where three hundred and thirty men 
are said to have defeated an army of between fifteen and 
twenty thousand Austrians. Scattered over the valley are 
to he found eleven stones, with this inscription, , the 
year the battle was fought, marking out, as I was told upon 
the spot, the several places where the Austrians,attempting 
to make a stand, were repulsed anew. 

And when a gathering weight of shadows brown 
Falls on the valleys as the sun goes down ; 
And Pikes, of darkness named and fear and 
storms , 
Uplift in quiet their illumined forms, 
In sea-like reach of prospect round him spread, 
Tinged like an angel's smile all rosy red — 
Awe in his breast with holiest love unites, 
And the near heavens impart their own delights. 
When downward to his winter hut he goes, 
Dear and more dear the lessening circle grows ; 
That hut which on the hills so oft employs 
His thoughts, the central point of all his joys. 
And as a swallow, at the hour of rest, 
Peeps often ere she darts into her nest, 
So to the homestead, where the grandsire tends 
A little prattling child, he oft descends, 
To glance a look upon the well-matched pair; 
Till storm and driving ice blockade him there. 
There, safely guarded by the woods behind, 
He hears the chiding of the baffled wind, 
Hears Winter calling all his terrors round, 
And, blest within himself, he shrinks not from the 
sound. 
Through Nature's vale his homely pleasures 
glide, 
Unstained by envy, discontent, and pride ; 
The bound of all his vanity, to deck, 
With one bright bell, a favourite heifer's neck ; 
Well pleased upon some simple annual feast, 
Remembered half the year and hoped the rest, 
If dairy-produce, from his inner hoard, 
Of thrice ten summers dignify the board. 
— Alas ! in every clime a flying ray 
Is all we have to cheer our wintry way ; 
And here the unwilling mind may more than 
trace 
The general sorrows of the human race : 
The churlish gales of penury, that blow 
Cold as the north-wind o'er a waste of snow, 
To them the gentle groups of bliss deny 
That on the noon-day bank of leisure he. 
Yet more ; — compelled by Powers which only 

That solitary man disturb their reign, 
Powers that support an unremitting strife 
With all the tender charities of life, 
Full oft the father, when his sons have grown 
To manhood, seems then title to disown ; 

 As Schreck-Horn, the pike of terror; Wetter-Horn, 
the pike of storms, &c. &c. 

DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES, &c. 

 

And from his nest amid the storms of heaven 
Drives, eagle-like, those sons as he was driven ; 
With stem composure watches to the plain — 
And never, eagle-like, beholds again ! 
When long-familiar joys are all resigned, 
Why does their sad remembrance haunt the mind ? 
Lo ! where through flat Batavia's willowy groves, 
Or by the lazy Seine, the exile roves ; 
O'er the curled waters Alpine measures swell, 
And search the affections to their inmost cell ; 
Sweet poison spreads along the listener's veins, 
Turning past pleasures into mortal pains ; 
Poison, which not a frame of steel can brave, 
Bows his young head with sorrow to the grave. 
Gay lark of hope, thy silent song resume ! 
Ye flattering eastern lights, once more the hills 
illume ! 
Fresh gales and dews of life's delicious morn. 
And thou, lost fragrance of the heart, return ! 
Alas ! the little joy to man allowed, 
Fades like the lustre of an evening cloud ; 
Or like the beauty in a flower installed, 
Whose season was, and cannot be recalled. 
Yet, when opprest by sickness, grief, or care, 
And taught that pain is pleasure's natural heir, 
We still confide in more than we can know ; 
Death would be else the favourite friend of woe. 
. 'Mid savage rocks, and seas of snow that shine, 
Between interminable tracts of pine, 
Within a temple stands an awful shrine, 
By an uncertain light revealed, that falls 
On the mute Image and the troubled walls. 
Oh ! give not me that eye of hard disdain 
That views, undimmed, Einsiedlen's f wretched 
fane. 
While ghastly faces through the gloom appear, 
Abortive joy, and hope that works in fear ; 
While prayer contends with silenced agony, 
Surely in other thoughts contempt may die. 
If the sad grave of human ignorance bear 
One flower of hope — oh, pass and leave it there ! 
The tall sun, pausing on an Alpine spire, 
Flings o'er the wilderness a stream of fire : 
Now meet we other pilgrims ere the day 
Close on the remnant of their weary way ; 

 The well-known effect of. the famous air, called in 
French Ranz des Vaches, upon the Swiss troops. 
t This shrine is resorted to, from a hope of relief, by 
multitudes, from every corner of the Catholic world, 
labouring under mental or bodily afflictions. 

While they are drawing toward the sacred floor 
Where, so they fondly think, the worm shall gnaw- 
no more. 
How gaily murmur and how sweetly taste 
The fountains reared for them amid the waste ! 
Their thirst they slake : — they wash their toil- 
worn feet, 
And some with tears of joy each other greet. 
Yes, I must see you when ye first behold 
Those holy turrets tipped with evening gold, 
In that glad moment will for you a sigh 
Be heaved, of charitable sympathy ; 
In that glad moment when your hands are prest 
In mute devotion on the thankful breast ! 
Last, let us turn to Chamouny that shields 
With rocks and gloomy woods her fertile fields : 
Five streams of ice amid her cots descend, 
And with wild flowers and blooming orchards 
blend ; — 
A scene more fair than what the Grecian feigns 
Of purple fights and ever- vernal plains ; 
Here all the seasons revel hand in hand : 
'Mid lawns and shades by breezy rivulets fanned, 
They sport beneath that mountain's matchless 
height 
That holds no commerce with the summer night. 
From age to age, throughout his lonely bounds 
The crash of ruin fitfully resounds ; 
Appalling havoc ! but serene his brow, 
Where daylight lingers on perpetual snow ; 
Glitter the stars above, and all is black below. 
What marvel then if many a Wanderer sigh, 
While roars the sullen Arve in anger by, 
That not for thy reward, unrivalled Vale ! 
Waves the ripe harvest in the autumnal gale ; 
That thou, the slave of slaves, art doomed to pine 
And droop, while no Italian arts are thine, 
To soothe or cheer, to soften or refine. 
Hail Freedom ! whether it was mine to stray, 
With shrill winds whistling round my lonely way, 
On the bleak sides of Cumbria's heath-clad moors, 
Or where dank sea-weed lashes Scotland's shores ; 
To scent the sweets of Piedmont's breathing rose, 
And orange gale that o'er Lugano blows ; 
Still have I found, where Tyranny prevails, 
That virtue languishes and pleasure fails, 
While the remotest hamlets blessings share 
In thy loved presence known, and only there ; 

 Rude fountains built and covered with sheds for 
the accommodation of the Pilgrims, in their ascent of the 
mountain. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Heart-blessings- — outward treasures too which the 
eye 
Of the sun peeping through the clouds can spy, 
And every passing breeze will testify. 
There, to the porch, belike with jasmine bound 
Or woodbine wreaths, a smoother path is wound ; 
The housewife there a brighter garden sees, 
Where hum on busier wing her happy bees ; 
On infant cheeks there fresher roses blow ; 
And grey-haired men look up with livelier brow, — 
To greet the traveller needing food and rest ; 
Housed for the night, or but a half-hour's guest. 
And oh, fair France ! though now the traveller sees 
Thy three- striped banner fluctuate on the breeze ; 
Though martial songs have banished songs of love, 
And nightingales desert the village grove, 
Scared by the fife and rumbling drum's alarms, 
And the short thunder, and the flash of arms ; 
That cease not till night falls, when far and nigh, 
Sole sound, the Sourd prolongs his mournful cry ! 
— Yet, hast thou found that Freedom spreads her 
power 
Beyond the cottage-hearth, the cottage-door : 
All nature smiles, and owns beneath her eyes 
Her fields peculiar, and peculiar skies. 
Yes, as I roamed where Loiret's waters glide 
Through rustling aspens heard from side to side, 
When from October clouds a milder light 
Fell where the blue flood rippled into white ; 
Methought from every cot the watchful bird 
Crowed with ear-piercing power till then unheard ; 
Each clacking mill, that broke the murmuring 
streams, 
Rocked the charmed thought in more delightful 
dreams ; 
Chasing those pleasant dreams, the falling leaf 
Awoke a fainter sense of moral grief ; 
The measured echo of the distant flail 
Wound in more welcome cadence down the vale ; 
With more majestic course the water rolled, 
And ripening foliage shone with richer gold. 
— But foes are gathering — Liberty must raise 
Red on the hills her beacon's far-seen blaze ; 
Must bid the tocsin ring from tower to tower ! — 
Nearer and nearer comes the trying hour ! 
Rejoice, brave Land, though pride's perverted ire 

 An insect so called, which emits a short, melancholy 
cry, heard at the close of the summer evenings, on the 
banks of the Loire. 
t The duties upon many parts of the French rivers were 
so exorbitant, that the poorer people, deprived of the 
benefit of water carriage, were obliged to transport their 
goods by land: 

Rouse hell's own aid, and wrap thy fields in fire : 
Lo, from the flames a great and glorious birth ; 
As if a new-made heaven were hailing a new earth ! 
— All cannot be : the promise is too fair 
For creatures doomed to breathe terrestrial air : 
Yet not for this will sober reason frown 
Upon that promise, nor the hope disown ; 
She knows that only from high aims ensue 
Rich guerdons, and to them alone are due. 
Great God ! by whom the strifes of men are 
weighed 
In an impartial balance, give thine aid 
To the just cause ; and, oh ! do thou preside 
Over the mighty stream now spreading wide : 
So shall its waters, from the heavens supplied 
In copious showers, from earth by wholesome 
springs, 
Brood o'er the long-parched lands with Nile-like 
wings ! 
And grant that every sceptred child of clay 
Who cries presumptuous, " Here the flood shall 
stay," 
May in its progress see thy guiding hand, 
And cease the acknowledged purpose to withstand ; 
Or, swept in anger from the insulted shore, 
Sink with his servile bands, to rise no more ! 
To-night, my Friend, within this humble cot 
Be scorn and fear and hope alike forgot 
In timely sleep ; and when, at break of day, 
On the tall peaks the glistening sunbeams play, 
With a light heart our course we may renew, 
The first whose footsteps print the mountain dew. 
 & . 

VII. 
LINES 
Left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree, which stands near the 
lake of Esthwaite, on a desolate part of the shore, com- 
manding a beautiful prospect. 
Nay, Traveller ! rest. This lonely Yew-tree stands 
Far from all human dwelling : what if here 
No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb ? 
What if the bee love not these barren boughs ? 
Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves, 
That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind 
By one soft impulse saved from vacancy. 
Who he was 

That piled these stones and with the mossy sod 
First covered, and here taught this aged Tree 
With its dark arms to form a circling bower, 
I well remember. — He was one who owned 

DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES, &c. 

 

No common soul. In youth by science nursed, 
And led by nature into a wild scene 
Of lofty hopes, he to the world went forth 
A favoured Being, knowing no desire 
Which genius did not hallow ; 'gainst the taint 
Of dissolute tongues, and jealousy, and hate, 
And scorn, — against all enemies prepared, 
All but neglect. The world, for so it thought, 
Owed him no service ; wherefore he at once 
With indignation turned himself away, 
And with the food of pride sustained his soul 
In solitude. — Stranger ! these gloomy boughs 
Had charms for him ; and here he loved to sit, 
His only visitants a straggling sheep, 
The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper : 
And on these barren rocks, with fern and heath, 
And juniper and thistle, sprinkled o'er, 
Fixing his downcast eye, he many an hour 
A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here 
An emblem of his own unfruitful life : 
And, lifting up his head, he then would gaze 
On the more distant scene, — how lovely 'tis 
Thou seest, — and he would gaze till it became 
Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain 
The beauty, still more beauteous ! Nor, that tune, 
When nature had subdued him to herself, 
Would he forget those Beings to whose minds 
Warm from the labours of benevolence 
The world, and human life, appeared a scene 
Of kindred loveliness : then he would sigh, 
Inly disturbed, to think that others felt 
What he must never feel : and so, lost Man ! 
On visionary views would fancy feed, 
Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale 
He died, — this seat his only monument. 
If Thou be one whose heart the holy forms 
Of young imagination have kept pure, 
Stranger ! henceforth be warned ; and know that 
pride, 
Howe'er disguised in its own majesty, 
Is littleness ; that he who feels contempt 
For any living thing, hath faculties 
Which he has never used ; that thought with him 
Is in its infancy. The man whose eye 
Is ever on himself doth look on one, 
The least of Nature's works, one who might move 
The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds 
Unlawful, ever. be wiser, Thou ! 
Instructed that true knowledge leads to love ; 
True dignity abides with him alone 
Who, in the silent hour of inward thought, 
Can still suspect, and still revere himself, 
In lowliness of heart. l . 

VIII. 
GUILT AND SORROW ; 
OR, 
INCIDENTS UPON SALISBURY PLAIN. 

ADVERTISEMENT, 
i'KEFLXED TO THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS POEM, PUBLISHED 
IN . 

Not less than one-third of the following poem, though it 
has from time to time been altered in the expression, was 
published so far back as the year , under the title of 
" The Female Vagrant." The extract is of such length that 
an apology seems to be required for reprinting it here : but 
it was necessary to restore it to its original position, or the 
rest would have been unintelligible. The whole was writ- 
ten before the close of the year , and I will detail, 
rather as matter of literary biography than for any other 
reason, the circumstances under which it was produced. 
During the latter part of the summer of J , having 
passed a month in the Isle of Wight, in view of the fleet 
which was then preparing for sea off Portsmouth at the 
commencement of the war, I left the place with melan- 
choly forebodings. The American war was still fresh in 
memory. The struggle which was beginning, and which 
many thought would be brought to a speedy close by the 
irresistible arms of Great Britain being added to those of 
the allies, I was assured in my own mind would be of long 
continuance, and productive of distress and misery beyond 
all possible calculation. This conviction was pressed upon 
me by having been a witness, during a long residence in 
revolutionary France, of the spirit which prevailed in that 
country. After leaving the Isle of Wight, I spent two 
days in wandering on foot over Salisbury Plain, which, 
though cultivation was then widely spread through parts 
of it, had upon the whole a still more impressive appear- 
ance than it now retains. 
The monuments and traces of antiquity, scattered in 
abundance over that region, led me unavoidably to com- 
pare what we know or guess of those remote times with 
certain aspects of modern society, and with calamities, 
principally those consequent upon war, to which, more 
than other classes of men, the poor are subject. In those 
reflections, joined with particular facts that had come to 
my knowledge, the following stanzas originated. 
In conclusion, to obviate some distraction in the minds 
of those who are well acquainted with Salisbury Plain, it 
may be proper to say, that of the features described as 
belonging to it, one or two are taken from other desolate 
parts of England. 

A Traveller on the skirt of Sarum's Plain 
Pursued his vagrant way, with feet half bare ; 
Stooping his gait, but not as if to gain 
Help from the staff he bore ; for mien and air 
Were hardy, though his cheek seemed worn with 
care 
Both of the time to come, and time long fled : 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Down fell in straggling locks his thin grey hair ; 
A coat he wore of military red 
But faded, and stuck o'er with many a patch and 
shred. 
ir. 
While thus he journeyed, step by step led on, 
He saw and passed a stately inn, full sure 
That welcome in such house for him was none. 
No board inscribed the needy to allure 
Hung there, no bush proclaimed to old and poor 
And desolate, " Here you will find a friend ! " 
The pendent grapes glittered above the door ; — 
On he must pace, perchance 'till night descend, 
Where'er the dreary roads their bare white lines 
extend. 
ut. 
The gathering clouds grew red with stormy fire, 
In streaks diverging wide and mounting high ; 
That inn he long had passed ; the distant spire, 
Which oft as he looked back had fixed his eye, 
Was lost, though still he looked, in the blank sky. 
Perplexed and comfortless he gazed around, 
And scarce could any trace of man descry, 
Save cornfields stretched and stretching without 
bound ; 
But where the sower dwelt was nowhere to be 
found. 
IV. 
No tree was there, no meadow's pleasant green, 
No brook to wet his lip or soothe his ear ; 
Long files of corn-stacks here and there were seen, 
But not one dwelling-place his heart to cheer. 
Some labourer, thought he, may perchance be near ; 
And so he sent a feeble shout — in vain ; 
No voice made answer, he could only hear 
Winds rustling over plots of unripe grain, 
Or whistling thro' thin grass along the unfurrowed 
plain. 
v. 
Long had he fancied each successive slope 
Concealed some cottage, whither he might turn 
And rest ; but now along heaven's darkening cope 
The crows rushed by in eddies, homeward borne. 
Thus warned he sought some shepherd's spreading 
thorn 
Or hovel from the storm to shield his head, 
But sought in vain ; for now, all wild, forlorn, 
And vacant, a huge waste around him spread ; 
The wet cold ground, he feared, must be his only 
bed. 
VI. 
And be it so — for to the chill night shower 
And the sharp wind his head he oft hath bared ; 

A Sailor he, who many a wretched hour 
Hath told ; for, landing after labour hard, 
Full long endured in hope of just reward, 
He to an armed fleet was forced away 
By seamen, who perhaps themselves had shared 
Like fate ; was hurried off, a helpless prey, 
'Gainst all that in Ms heart, or theirs perhaps, said 
nay. 
VII. 
For years the work of carnage did not cease, 
And death's dire aspect daily he surveyed, 
Death's minister ; then came his glad release, 
And hope returned, and pleasure fondly made 
Her dwelling in his dreams. By Fancy's aid 
The happy husband flies, his arms to throw 
Round his wife's neck ; the prize of victory laid 
In her full lap, he sees such sweet tears flow 
As if thenceforth nor pain nor trouble she could 
know. 

Vain hope ! for fraud took all that he had earned. 
The lion roars and gluts his tawny brood 
Even in the desert's heart ; but he, returned, 
Bears not to those he loves their needful food. 
His home approaching, but in such a mood 
That from his sight his children might have run, 
He met a traveller, robbed him, shed his blood ; 
And when the miserable work was done 
He fled, a vagrant since, the murderer's fate to 
shun. 

From that day forth no place to him could be 
So lonely, but that thence might come a pang 
Brought from without to inward misery. 
Now, as he plodded on, with sullen clang 
A sound of chains along the desert rang ; 
He looked, and saw upon a gibbet high 
A human body that in irons swang, 
Uplifted by the tempest whirling by ; 
And, hovering, round it often did a raven fly. 

It was a spectacle which none might view, 
In spot so savage, but with shuddering pain ; 
Nor only did for him at once renew 
All he had feared from man, but roused a train 
Of the mind's phantoms, horrible as vain. 
The stones, as if to cover him from day, 
Rolled at his back along the living plain ; 
He fell, and without sense or motion lay ; 
But, when the trance was gone, feebly pursued his 
way. 

GUILT AND SORROW. 

 

As one whose brain habitual phrensy fires 
Owes to the fit in which his soul hath tossed 
Profounder quiet, when the fit retires, 
Even so the dire phantasma which had crossed 
His sense, in sudden vacancy quite lost, 
Left his mind stiU as a deep evening stream. 
Nor, if accosted now, in thought engrossed, 
Moody, or inly troubled, would he seem 
To traveller who might talk of any casual theme. 
XII. 
Hurtle the clouds in deeper darkness piled, 
Gone is the raven timely rest to seek ; 
He seemed the only creature in the wild 
On whom the elements their rage might wreak ; 
Save that the bustard, of those regions bleak 
Shy tenant, seeing by the uncertain light 
A man there wandering, gave a mournful shriek, 
And half upon the ground, with strange affright, 
Forced hard against the wind a thick unwieldy 
flight. 
XIII. 
All, all was cheerless to the horizon's bound ; 
The weary eye — which, wheresoe'er it strays, 
Marks nothing but the red sun's setting round, 
Or on the earth strange lines, in former days 
Left by gigantic arms — at length surveys 
What seems an antique castle spreading wide ; 
Hoary and naked are its walls, and raise 
Their brow sublime : in shelter there to bide 
He turned, while rain poured down smoking on 
every side. 
XIV. 
Pile of Stone-henge ! so proud to hint yet keep 
Thy secrets, thou that lov'st to stand and hear 
The Plain resounding to the whirlwind's sweep, 
Inmate of lonesome Nature's endless year ; 
Even if thou saw'st the giant wicker rear 
For sacrifice its throngs of living men, 
Before thy face did ever wretch appear, 
Who in his heart had groaned with deadlier pain 
Than he who, tempest-driven, thy shelter now 
would gain. 
XV. 
Within that fabric of mysterious form, 
Winds met in conflict, each by turns supreme ; 
And, from the perilous ground dislodged, through 
storm 
And rain he wildered on, no moon to stream 
From gulf of parting clouds one friendly beam, 
Nor any friendly sound his footsteps led ; 
Once did the lightning's faint disastrous gleam 

Disclose a naked guide-post's double head, 
Sight which tho' lost at once a gleam of pleasure 
shed. 
XVI. 
No swinging sign-board creaked from cottage elm 
To stay his steps with faintness overcome ; 
'Twas dark and void as ocean's watery realm 
Roaring with storms beneath night's starless gloom ; 
No gipsy cower'd o'er fire of furze or broom ; 
No labourer watched his red kiln glaring bright, 
Nor taper glimmered dim from sick man's room ; 
Along the waste no line of mournful light 
From lamp of lonely toll-gate streamed athwart 
the night. 
XVII. 
At length, though hid in clouds, the moon arose ; 
The downs were visible — and now revealed 
A structure stands, which two bare slopes enclose. 
It was a spot, where, ancient vows fulfilled, 
Kind pious hands did to the Virgin build 
A lonely Spital, the belated swain 
From the night terrors of that waste to shield : 
But there no human being could remain, 
And now the walls are named the " Dead House " 
of the plain. 
XVIII. 
Though he had little cause to love the abode 
Of man, or covet sight of mortal face, 
Yet when faint beams of light that ruin showed, 
How glad he was at length to find some trace 
Of human shelter in that dreary place. 
Till to his flock the early shepherd goes, 
Here shall much-needed sleep his frame embrace. 
In a dry nook where fern the floor bestrows 
He lays his stiffened limbs, — his eyes begin to close ; 

When hearing a deep sigh, that seemed to come 
From one who mourned in sleep, he raised his 
head, 
And saw a woman in the naked room 
Outstretched, and turning on a restless bed : 
The moon a wan dead light around her shed. 
He waked her — spake in tone that would not fail, 
He hoped, to calm her mind ; but ill he sped, 
For of that ruin she had heard a tale 
Which now with freezing thoughts did all her 
powers assail ; 
XX. 
Had heard of one who, forced from storms to 
shroud, 
Felt the loose walls of this decayed Retreat 

 

'OEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Rock to incessant neighings shrill and loud, 
While his horse pawed the floor with furious heat ; 
Till on a stone, that sparkled to his feet, 
Struck, and still struck again, the troubled horse : 
The man half raised the stone with pain and sweat, 
Half raised, for well his arm might lose its force 
Disclosing the grim head of a late murdered corse. 

Such tale of this lone mansion she had learned 
And, when that shape, with eyes in sleep half 
drowned, 
By the moon's sullen lamp she first discerned, 
Cold stony horror all her senses bound. 
Her he addressed in words of cheering sound ; 
Recovering heart, like answer did she make ; 
And well it was that, of the corse there found, 
In converse that ensued she nothing spake ; 
She knew not what dire pangs in him such tale 
could wake. 
XXII. 
But soon his voice and words of kind intent 
Banished that dismal thought ; and now the wind 
In fainter howlings told its rage was spent : 
Meanwhile discourse ensued of various kind, 
Which by degrees a confidence of mind 
And mutual interest failed not to create. 
And, to a natural sympathy resigned, 
In that forsaken building where they sate 
The Woman thus retraced her own untoward fate. 

" By Derwent's side my father dwelt — a man 
Of virtuous life, by pious parents bred ; 
And I believe that, soon as I began 
To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed, 
And in his hearing there my prayers I said : 
And afterwards, by my good father taught, 
I read, and loved the books in which I read ; 
For books in every neighbouring house I sought, 
And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought. 

A little croft we owned — a plot of corn, 
A garden stored with peas, and mint, and thyme, 
And flowers for posies, oft on Sunday morn 
Plucked while the church bells rang their earliest 
chime. 
Can I forget our freaks at shearing time ! ' 
My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied; 
The cowslip-gathering in June's dewy prime ; 
The swans that with white chests upreared in pride 
Rushing and racing came to meet me at the water- 
side ! 


The staff I well remember which upbore 
The bending body of my active sire ; 
His seat beneath the honied sycamore 
Where the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire ; 
When market-morning came, the neat attire 
With which, though bent on haste, myself I decked ; 
Our watchful house-dog, that would tease and tire 
The stranger till its barking-fit I checked ; 
The red-breast, known for years, which at my 
casement pecked. 

The suns of twenty summers danced along, — 
Too little marked how fast they rolled away : 
But, through severe mischance and cruel wrong, 
My father's substance fell into decay : 
We toiled and struggled, hoping for a day 
When Fortune might put on a kinder look ; 
But vain were wishes, efforts vain as they ; 
He from his old hereditary nook 
Must part ; the summons came ; — our final leave 
we took. 
XXVII. 
It was indeed a miserable hour 
When, from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed, 
Peering above the trees, the steeple tower 
That on his marriage day sweet music made ! 
Till then, he hoped his bones might there be laid 
Close by my mother in their native bowers : 
Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed ; — 
I could not pray : — through tears that fell in 
showers 
Glimmered our dear-loved home, alas ! no longer 
ours ! 
xxvin. 
There was a Youth whom I had loved so long, 
That when I loved him not I cannot say : 
'Mid the green mountains many a thoughtless song 
We two had sung, like gladsome birds in May ; 
When we began to tire of childish play, 
We seemed still more and more to prize each other; 
We talked of marriage and our marriage day ; 
And I in truth did love him like a brother, 
For never could I hope to meet with such another. 

Two years were passed since to a distant town 
He had repaired to ply a gainful trade : 
What tears of bitter grief, till then unknown ! 
What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed ! 
To him we turned : — we had no other aid : 
Like one revived, upon his neck I wept ; 

GUILT AND SORROW. 

 

And her whom he had loved in joy, he said, 
He well could love in grief ; his faith he kept ; 
And in a quiet home once more my father slept. 

We lived in peace and comfort ; and were blest 
With daily bread, by constant toil supplied. 
Three lovely babes had lain upon my breast : 
And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed, 
And knew not why. My happy father died, 
When threatened war reduced the children's meal : 
Thrice happy ! that for him the grave could hide 
The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel, 
And tears that flowed for ills which patience might 
not heal. 
xxxr. 
'Twas a hard change ; an evil time was come ; 
We had no hope, and no relief could gain : 
But soon, with proud parade, the noisy drum 
Beat round to clear the streets of want and pain. 
My husband's arms now only served to strain 
Me and his children hungering in his view ; 
In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain : 
To join those miserable men he flew, 
And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we 
drew. 


There were we long neglected, and we bore 
Much sorrow ere the fleet its anchor weighed ; 
Green fields before us, and our native shore, 
We breathed a pestilential air, that made 
Ravage for which no knell was heard. We prayed 
For our departure ; wished and wished — nor knew, 
'Mid that long sickness and those hopes delayed, 
That happier days we never more must view. 
The parting signal streamed — at last the land with- 
drew. 
xxxnr. 
But the calm summer season now was past. 
On as we drove, the equinoctial deep 
Ran mountains high before the howling blast, 
And many perished in the whirlwind's sweep. 
We gazed with terror on their gloomy sleep, 
Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue, 
Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap, 
That we the mercy of the waves should rue : 
We reached the western world, a poor devoted 
crew. 
XXXIV. 
The pains and plagues that on our heads came 
down, 
Disease and famine, agony and fear, 

In wood or wilderness, in camp or town, 
It would unman the firmest heart to hear. 
All perished — all in one remorseless year, 
Husband and children ! one by one, by sword 
And ravenous plague, all perished : every tear 
Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board 
A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored." 

Here paused she of all present thought forlorn, 
Nor voice, nor sound, that moment's pain expressed, 
Yet Nature, with excess of grief o'erborne, 
From her full eyes their watery load released. 
He too was mute ; and, ere her weeping ceased, 
He rose, and to the ruin's pBrtal went, 
And saw the dawn opening the silvery east 
With rays of promise, north and southward sent ; 
And soon with crimson fire kindled the firmament. 

" come," he cried, " come, after weary night 
Of such rough storm, this happy change to view." 
So forth she came, and eastward looked ; the sight 
Over her brow like dawn of gladness threw ; 
Upon her cheek, to which its youthful hue 
Seemed to return, dried the last lingering tear, 
And from her grateful heart a fresh one drew : 
The whilst her comrade to her pensive cheer 
Tempered fit words of hope ; and the lark warbled 

They looked and saw a lengthening road, and wain 
That rang down a bare slope not far remote : 
The barrows glistered bright with drops of rain, 
Whistled the waggoner with merry note, 
The cock far off sounded his clarion throat ; 
But town, or farm, or hamlet, none they viewed, 
Only were told there stood a lonely cot 
A long mile thence. While thither they pursued 
Their way, the Woman thus her mournful tale 
renewed. 

xxxvnr. 
 Peaceful as this immeasurable plain 
Is now, by beams of dawning light imprest, 
In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main ; 
The very ocean hath its hour of rest. 
I too forgot the heavings of my breast. 
How quiet 'round me ship and ocean were ! 
As quiet all within me. I was blest, 
And looked, and fed upon the silent air 
Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair, 
c  

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

XXXIX, 
All ! how unlike those late terrific sleeps, 
And groans that rage of racking famine spoke ; 
The unburied dead that lay in festering heaps, 
The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke, 
The shriek that from the distant battle broke, 
The mine's dire earthquake, and the pallid host 
Driven by the bomb's incessant thunder-stroke 
To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish 
tossed, 
Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost ! 

Some mighty gulf of separation past, 
I seemed transported^ another world ; 
A thought resigned with pain, when from the 
mast 
The impatient mariner the sail unfurled, 
And, whistling, called the wind that hardly curled 
The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home 
And from all hope I was for ever hurled. 
For me — farthest from earthly port to roam 
Was best, could I but shun the spot where man 
might come. 
XLI. 
And oft I thought (my fancy was so strong) 
That I, at last, a resting-place had found ; 
' Here will I dwell,' said I, ' my whole life long, 
Roaming the illimitable waters round ; 
Here will I live, of all but heaven disowned, 
And end my days upon the peaceful flood.' — 
To break my dream the vessel reached its bound ; 
And homeless near a thousand homes I stood, 
And near a thousand tables pined and wanted 
food. 
xur. 
No help I sought; in sorrow turned adrift, 
Was hopeless, as if cast on some bare rock ; 
Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift, 
Nor raised my hand at any door to knock. 
I lay where, with his drowsy mates, the cock 
From the cross-timber of an out-house hung : 
Dismally tolled, that night, the city clock ! 
At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung, 
Nor to the beggar's language could I fit my 
tongue. 

So passed a second day ; and, when the third 
Was come, I tried in vain the crowd's resort. 
— In deep despair, by frightful wishes stirred, 
Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort ; 
There, pains which nature could no more support, 

With blindness linked, did on my vitals fail ; 
And, after many interruptions short 
Of hideous sense, I sank, nor step could crawl : 
Unsought for was the help that did my life recal. 

Borne to a hospital, I lay with brain 
Drowsy and weak, and shattered memory ; 
I heard my neighbours in their beds complain 
Of many things which never troubled me — 
Of feet still bustling round with busy glee, 
Of looks where common kindness had no part, 
Of service done with cold formality, 
Fretting the fever round the languid heart, 
And groans which, as they said, might make a dead 
man start. 
XLV. 
These things just served to stir the slumbering 
sense, 
Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised. 
With strength did memory return ; and, thence 
Dismissed, again on open day I gazed, 
At houses, men, and common light, amazed. 
The lanes I sought, and, as the sun retired, 
Came where beneath the trees a faggot blazed; 
The travellers saw me weep, my fate inquired, 
And gave me food — and rest, more welcome, more 
desired. 
XL VI. 
Rough potters seemed they, trading soberly 
With panniered asses driven from door to door ; 
But life of happier sort set forth to me, 
And other joys my fancy to allure — 
The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor 
In barn uplighted ; and companions boon, 
Well met from far with revelry secure 
Among the forest glades, while jocund June 
Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial 
moon. 
XLVir. 
But ill they suited me — those journeys dark 
O'er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch ! 
To charm the surly house-dog's faithful bark, 
Or hang on tip-toe at the lifted latch. 
The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match, 
The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill, 
And ear still busy on its nightly watch, 
Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill : 
Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brood- 
ing still. 
xlvhi. 
What could I do, unaided and unblest ? 
My father ! gone was every friend of thine : 

GUILT AND SORROW. 

• 

And kindred of dead husband are at best 
Small help ; and, after marriage such as mine, 
With little kindness would to me incline. 
Nor was I then for toil or service fit ; 
My deep-drawn sighs no effort could confine ; 
In open air forgetful would I sit 
Whole hours, with idle arms in moping sorrow 
knit. 
XLIX. 
The roads I paced, I loitered through the fields ; 
Contentedly, yet sometimes self-accused, 
Trusted my life to what chance bounty yields, 
Now coldly given, now utterly refused. 
The ground I for my bed have often used : 
But what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth, 
Is that I have my inner self abused, 
Foregone the home delight of constant truth, 
And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless 
youth. 
L. 
Through tears the rising sun I oft have viewed, 
Through tears have seen him towards that world 
descend 
Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude : 
Three years a wanderer now my course I bend — 
Oh ! tell me whither— for no earthly friend 
Have I." — She ceased, and weeping turned away ; 
As if because her tale was at an end, 
She wept ; because she had no more to say 
Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay. 

True sympathy the Sailor's looks expressed, 
His looks — for pondering he was mute the while. 
Of social Order's care for wretchedness, 
Of Time's sure help to calm and reconcile, 
Joy's second spring and Hope's long-treasured 
smile, 
'Twas not for Mm to speak— a man so tried. 
Yet, to relieve her heart, in friendly style 
Proverbial words of comfort he applied, 
And not in vain, while they went pacing side by 
side. 
LII. 
Ere long, from heaps of turf, before their sight, 
Together smoking in the sun's slant beam, 
Rise various wreaths that into one unite 
Which high and higher mounts with silver gleam : 
Fair spectacle, — brt instantly a scream 
Thence bursting shrill did all remark prevent ; 
They paused, and heard a hoarser voice blaspheme, 
And female cries. Their course they thither bent, 
And met a man who foamed with anger vehement. 

A woman stood with quivering lips and pale, 
And, pointing to a little child that lay 
Stretched on the ground, began a piteous tale ; 
How in a simple freak of thoughtless play 
He had provoked his father, who straightway, 
As if each blow were deadlier than the last, 
Struck the poor innocent. Pallid with dismay 
The Soldier's Widow heard and stood aghast ; 
And stern looks on the man her grey-haired Com- 
rade cast. 

His voice with indignation rising high 
Such further deed in manhood's name forbade ; 
The peasant, wild in passion, made reply 
With bitter insult and revilings sad ; 
Asked him in scorn what busmess there he had ; 
What kind of plunder he was hunting now ; 
The gallows would one day of him be glad ; — 
Though inward anguish damped the Sailor's brow, 
Yet calm he seemed as thoughts so poignant would 
allow. 

Softly he stroked the child, who lay outstretched 
With face to earth ; and, as the boy turned round 
His battered head, a groan the Sailor fetched 
As if he saw — there and upon that ground — 
Strange repetition of the deadly wound 
He had himself inflicted. Through his brain 
At once the griding iron passage found ; 
Deluge of tender thoughts then rushed amain, 
Nor could his sunken eyes the starting tear restrain. 

Within himself he said — What hearts have we ! 
The blessing this a father gives his child ! 
Yet happy thou, poor boy ! compared with me, 
Suffering not doing ill — fate far more mild. 
The stranger's looks and tears of wrath beguiled 
The father, and relenting thoughts awoke ; 
He kissed his son — so all was reconciled, 
Then, with a voice which inward trouble broke 
Ere to his lips it came, the Sailor them bespoke. 

" Bad is the world, and hard is the world's law 
Even for the man who wears the warmest fleece ; 
Much need have ye that time more closely draw 
The bond of nature, all unkindness cease, 
And that among so few there still be peace : 
Else can ye hope but with such numerous foes 
Your pains shall ever with your years increase " — 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

While from his heart the appropriate lesson flows, 
A correspondent calm stole gently o'er his woes. 

Forthwith the pair passed on ; and down they look 
Into a narrow valley's pleasant scene 
Where wreaths of vapour tracked a winding brook, 
That babbled on through groves and meadows 
green ; 
A low-roofed house peeped out the trees between ; 
The dripping groves resound with cheerful lays, 
And melancholy lowings intervene 
Of scattered herds, that in the meadow graze, 
Some amid lingering shade, some touched by the 
sun's rays. 
LEX. 
They saw and heard, and, winding with the road 
Down a thick wood, they dropt into the vale ; 
Comfort by prouder mansions unbestowed 
Their wearied frames, she hoped, would soon 
regale. 
Erelong they reached that cottage in the dale : 
It was a rustic inn ; — the board was spread, 
The milk-maid followed with her brimming pail, 
And lustily the master carved the bread, 
Kindly the housewife pressed, and they in comfort 
fed. 
LX. 
Their breakfast done, the pair, though loth, must 
part ; 
Wanderers whose course no longer now agrees. 
She rose and bade farewell ! and, while her heart 
Struggled with tears nor could its sorrow ease, 
She left him there ; for, clustering round his knees, 
With his oak-staff the cottage children played ; 
And soon she reached a spot o'erhung with trees 
And banks of ragged earth ; beneath the shade 
Across the pebbly road a little runnel strayed. 

A cart and horse beside the rivulet stood ; 
Chequering the canvas roof the sunbeams shone. 
She saw the carman bend to scoop the flood 
As the wain fronted her, — wherein lay one, 
A pale-faced Woman, in disease far gone. 
The carman wet her. lips as well behoved ; 
Bed under her lean body there was none, 
Though even to die near one she most had loved 
She could not of herself those wasted limbs have 
moved. 
LXII. 
The Soldier's Widow learned with honest pain 
And homefelt force of sympathy sincere, 

Why thus that worn-out wretch must there sustain 
The jolting road and morning air severe. 
The wain pursued its way ; and following near 
In pure compassion she her steps retraced 
Far as the cottage. " A sad sight is here," 
She cried aloud ; and forth ran out in haste 
The friends whom she had left but a few minutes 
past. 
Lxin. 
While to the door with eager speed they ran, 
From her bare straw the Woman half upraised 
Her bony visage — gaunt and deadly wan ; 
No pity asking, on the group she gazed 
With a dim eye, distracted and amazed ; 
Then sank upon her straw with feeble moan. 
Fervently cried the housewife — " God be praised, 
I have a house that I can call my own ; 
Nor shall she perish there, untended and alone !" 

So in they bear her to the chimney seat, 
And busily, though yet with fear, untie 
Her garments, and, to warm her icy feet 
And chafe her temples, careful hands apply. 
Nature reviving, with a deep-drawn sigh 
She strove, and not in vain, her head to rear ; 
Then said — " I thank you all ; if I must die, 
The God in heaven my prayers for you will hear ; 
Till now  did not think my end had been so near. 

" Barred every comfort labour could procure, 
Suffering what no endurance could assuage, 
I was compelled to seek my father's door, 
Though loth to be a burthen on his age. 
But sickness stopped me in an early stage 
Of my sad journey ; and within the wain 
They placed me — there to end life's pilgrimage, 
Unless beneath your roof I may remain : 
For I shall never see my father's door again. 

" My life, Heaven knows, hath long been burthen- 
some ; 
But, if I have not meekly suffered, meek 
May my end be ! Soon will this voice be dumb : 
Should child of mine e'er wander hither, speak 
Of me, say that the worm is on my cheek. — 
Torn from our hut, that stood beside the sea 
Near Portland lighthouse in a lonesome creek, 
My husband served in sad captivity 
On shipboard, bound till peace or death should set 
him free. 



GUILT AND SORROW. 

 

" A sailor's wife I knew a widow's cares, 
Yet two sweet little ones partook my bed ; 
Hope cheered my dreams, and to my daily prayers 
Our heavenly Father granted each day's bread ; 
Till one was found by stroke of violence dead, 
Whose body near our cottage chanced to lie ; 
A dire suspicion drove us from our shed ; 
In vain to find a friendly face we try, 
Nor could we live together those poor boys and I ; 

" For evil tongues made oath how on that day 
My husband lurked about the neighbourhood ; 
Now he had fled, and whither none could say, 
And he had done the deed in the dark wood — 
Near his own home ! — but he was mild and good ; 
Never on earth was gentler creature seen ; 
He 'd not have robbed the raven of its food. 
My husband's loving kindness stood between 
Me and all worldly harms and wrongs however 
keen." 

Alas ! the thing she told with labouring breath 
The Sailor knew too well. That wickedness 
His hand had wrought ; and when, in the hour of 
death, 
He saw his Wife's lips move his name to bless 
With her last words, unable to suppress 
His anguish, with his heart he ceased to strive ; 
And, weeping loud in this extreme distress, 
He ci'ied — " Do pity me ! That thou shouldst live 
I neither ask nor wish — forgive me, but forgive ! " 

To tell the change that Voice within her wrought 
Nature by sign or sound made no essay ; 
A sudden joy surprised expiring thought, 
And every mortal pang dissolved away. 
Borne gently to a bed, in death she lay ; 
Yet still while over her the husband bent, 
A look was in her face which seemed to say, 
" Be blest ; by sight of thee from heaven was sent 
Peace to my parting soul, the fulness of content." 

She slept in peace, — his pulses throbbed and stopped, 
Breathless he gazed upon her face, — then took 
Her hand in Ms, and raised it, but both dropped, 
When on his own he cast a rueful look. 
His ears were never silent ; sleep forsook 
His burning eyelids stretched and stiff as lead ; 
All night from time to time under him shook 
The floor as he lay shuddering on his bed ; 
And oft he groaned aloud, " God, that I were 
dead ! " 
LXXII. 
The Soldier's Widow lingered in the cot ; ' 
And, when he rose, he thanked her pious care 
Through which his Wife, to that kind shelter 
brought, 
Died in his arms ; and with those thanks a prayer 
He breathed for her, and for that merciful pair. 
The corse interred, not one hour he remained 
Beneath their roof, but to the open air 
A burthen, now with fortitude sustained, 
He bore within a breast where dreadful quiet 
reigned. 
Lxxnr. 
Confirmed of purpose, fearlessly prepared 
For act and suffering, to the city straight 
He journeyed, and forthwith his crime declared : 
" And from your doom," he added, " now I wait, 
Nor let it linger long, the murderer's fate." 
Not ineffectual was that piteous claim : 
" O welcome sentence which will end though late," 
He said, " the pangs that to my conscience came 
Out of that deed. My trust, Saviour ! is in thy 
name ! " 
LXXIV. 
His fate was pitied. Him in iron case 
(Reader, forgive the intolerable thought) 
They hung not : — no one on his form or face 
Could gaze, as on a show by idlers sought ; 
No kindred sufferer, to his death-place brought 
By lawless curiosity or chance, 
When into storm the evening sky is wrought, 
Upon his swinging corse an eye can glance, 
And drop, as he once dropped, in miserable trance. 
-. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTPI. 

THE BORDERERS. 
(Composed -.) 

DRAMATIS PERSONS. 

Of the Baud of Borderers. 

Forester. 
Eldred, a Peasant. 
Peasant, Pilgrims, &c. 
Idonea. 
Female Beggar. 
Eleanor, Wife to Eldred 

Marmaduke 
Oswald. 
Wallace. 
Lacy. 
Lennox. 
Herbert. 
Wilfred, Servant to Marmaduke. 
Host. 
Scene, Borders of England and Scotland. 
Time, the Reign of Henry III. 
Readers already acquainted with my Poems will recognise, in the following composition, some eight or ten lines, 
which I have not scrupled to retain in the places where they originally stood. It is proper however to add, that they 
would not have been used elsewhere, if I had foreseen the time when I might he induced to publish this Tragedy. 
February , . 


ACT I. 
Scene, road in a Wood. 
Wallace and Lacy. 
Lacy. The Troop will be impatient ; let us hie 
Back to our post, and strip the Scottish Foray 
Of their rich Spoil, ere they recross the Border. 
— Pity that our young Chief will have no part 
In this good service. 
Wal. Rather let us grieve 
That, in the undertaking which has caused 
His absence, he hath sought, whate'er his aim, 
Companionship with One of crooked ways, 
From whose perverted soul can come no good 
To our confiding, open-hearted, Leader. 
Lacy. True ; and, remembering how the Band 
have proved 
That Oswald finds small favour in our sight, 
Well may we wonder he has gained such power 
Over our much-loved Captain. 
Wal. I have heard 
Of some dark deed to which in early life 
His passion drove him — then a Voyager 
Upon the midland Sea. You knew his bearing 
In Palestine ? 
Lacy. Where he despised alike 
Mohammedan and Christian. But enough ; 
Let us begone — the Band may else be foiled. 
[Exeunt. 

Enter Marmaduke and Wilfred. 
Wil. Be cautious, my dear Master ! 
Mar. I perceive 
That fear is like a cloak which old men huddle 
About their love, as if to keep it warm. 
Wil. Nay, but I grieve that we should part. 
This Stranger, 
For such he is 
Mar. Your busy fancies, Wilfred, 
Might tempt me to a smile ; but what of him I 
Wil. You know that you have saved his life. 
Mar. I know it. 
Wil. And that he hates you ! — Pardon me, per- 
haps 
That word was hasty. 
Mar. Fy ! no more of it. 
Wil. Dear Master ! gratitude 's a heavy burden 
To a proud Soul. — Nobody loves this Oswald — 
Yourself, you do not love him. 
Mar. I do more, 
I honour him. Strong feelings to his heart 
Are natural ; and from no one can be learnt 
More of man's thoughts and ways than his experience 
Has given him power to teach : and then for courage 
And enterprise — what perils hath he shunned ? 
What obstacles hath he failed to overcome ? 
Answer these questions, from our common know- 
ledge, 
And be at rest. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Wil. Oh, Sir ! 
Mar. Peace, my good Wilfred ; 
Repair to Liddesdale, and tell the Band 
I shall be with them in two days, at farthest. 
Wil. May He whose eye is over all protect you ! 
[Exit. 
Enter Oswald (a bunch of plants in his hand). 
Osw. This wood is rich in plants and curious 
simples. 
Mar. (looking at them). The wild rose, and the 
poppy, and the nightshade : 
Which is your favorite, Oswald ? 
Osw. That which, while it is 
Strong to destroy, is also strong to heal — 
[Looking forward. 
Not yet in sight ! — We ' saunter here awhile ; 
They cannot mount the hill, by us unseen. 
Mar. (a letter in his hand). It is no common 
thing when one like you 
Performs these delicate services, and therefore 
I feel myself much bounden to you, Oswald ; 
'Tis a strange letter this ! — You saw her write it ? 
Osw. And saw the tears with which she blotted it. 
Mar. And nothing less would satisfy him ? 
Osw. No less ; 
For that another in his Child's affection 
Should hold a place, as if 'twere robbery, 
He seemed to quarrel with the very thought. 
Besides, I know not what strange prejudice 
Is rooted in his mind ; this Band of ours, 
Which you 've collected for the noblest ends, 
Along the confines of the Esk and Tweed 
To guard the Innocent — he calls us " Outlaws :" 
And, for yourself, in plain terms he asserts 
This garb was taken up that indolence 
Might want no cover, and rapacity 
Be better fed. 
Mar. Ne'er may I own the heart 
That cannot feel for one, helpless as he is. 
Osw. Thou know'st me for a Man not easily 
moved, 
Yet was I grievously provoked to think 
Of what I witnessed. 
Mar. This day will suffice 
To end her wrongs. 
Osw. But if the blind Man's tale 
Should yet be true ? 
Mar. Would it were possible ! 
Did not the Soldier tell thee that himself, 
And others who survived the wreck, beheld 
The Baron Herbert perish in the waves 
Upon the coast of Cyprus ? 
Osw. Yes, even so, 

And I had heard the like before : in sooth 
The tale of this his quondam Barony 
Is cunningly devised ; and, on the back 
Of his forlorn appearance, could not fail 
To make the proud and vain his tributaries, 
And stir the pulse of lazy charity. 
The seignories of Herbert are in Devon ; 
We, neighbours of the Esk and Tweed : 'tis much 
The Arch-impostor 
Mar. Treat him gently, Oswald ; 
Though I have never seen his face, methinks, 
There cannot come a day when I shall cease 
To love him. I remember, when a Boy 
Of scarcely seven years' growth, beneath the Elm 
That casts its shade over our village school, 
'Twas my delight to sit and hear Idonea 
Repeat her Father's terrible adventures, 
Till all the band of play -mates wept together ; 
And that was the beginning of my love. 
And, through all converse of our later years, 
An image of this old Man still was present, 
When I had been most happy. Pardon me 
If this be idly spoken. 
Osw. See, they come, 
Two Travellers ! 
Mar. {points). The woman is Idonea. 
Osw. And leading Herbert. 
Mar. We must let them pass — 
This thicket will conceal us. [They step aside. 
Enter Idonea, leading Herbert blind. 
Idon. Dear Father, you sigh deeply ; ever since 
We left the willow shade by the brook-side, 
Your natural breathing has been troubled. 
Her. Nay, 
You are too fearful ; yet must I confess, 
Our march of yesterday had better suited 
A firmer step than mine. 
Idon. That dismal Moor — 
In spite of all the larks that cheered our path, 
I never can forgive it : but how steadily 
You paced along, when the bewildering moonlight 
Mocked me with many a strange fantastic shape ! — 
I thought the Convent never would appear ; 
It seemed to move away from us : and yet, 
That you are thus the fault is mine ; for the air 
Was soft and warm, no dew lay on the grass, 
And midway on the waste ere night had fallen 
I spied a Covert walled and roofed with sods — 
A miniature ; belike some Shepherd-boy, 
Who might have found a nothing-doing hour 
Heavier than work, raised it : within that hut 
We might have made a kindly bed of heath, 
And thankfully there rested side by side 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Wrapped in our cloaks, and, with recruited strength, 
Have hailed the morning sun. But cheerily, 
Father, — 
That staff of yours, I could almost have heart 
To fling 't away from you : you make no use 
Of me, or of my strength ; — come, let me feel 
That you do press upon me. There — indeed 
You are quite exhausted. Let us rest awhile 
On this green bank. [He sits down. 
Her. {after some time). Idonea, you are silent, 
And I divine the cause. 
Idon. Do not reproach me : 
I pondered patiently your wish and will 
When I gave way to your request ; and now, 
When I behold the ruins of that face, 
Those eyeballs dark — dark beyond hope of light, 
And think that they were blasted for my sake, 
The name of Marmaduke is blown away : 
Father, I would not change that sacred feeling 
For all this world can give. 
Her. Nay, be composed : 
Few minutes gone a faintness overspread 
My frame, and I bethought me of two things 
I ne'er had heart to separate — my grave, 
And thee, my Child ! 
Idon. Believe me, honoured She ! 
'Tis weariness that breeds these gloomy fancies, 
And you mistake the cause : you hear the woods 
Resound with music, could you see the sun, 
And look upon the pleasant face of Nature 
Her. I comprehend thee — I should be as cheerful 
As if we two were twins ; two songsters bred 
In the same nest, my spring-time one with thine. 
My fancies, fancies if they be, are such 
As come, dear Child ! from a far deeper source 
Than bodily weariness. While here we sit 
I feel my strength returning. — The bequest 
Of thy kind Patroness, which to receive 
We have thus far adventured, will suffice 
To save thee from the extreme of penury ; 
But when thy Father must he down and die, 
How wilt thou stand alone ? 
Idon. Is he not strong ? 
Is he not valiant ? 
Her. Am I then so soon 
Forgotten  have my warnings passed so quickly 
Out of thy mind ? My dear, my only, Child ; 
Thou wouldst be leaning on a broken reed — 
This Marmaduke 
Idon. could you hear his voice : 
Alas ! you do not know him. He is one 
(I wot not what ill tongue has wronged him with you) 
All gentleness and love. His face bespeaks 
A deep and simple meekness : and that Soul, 

Which with the motion of a virtuous act 
Flashes a look of terror upon guilt, 
Is, after conflict, quiet as the ocean, 
By a miraculous finger, stilled at once. 
Her. Unhappy Woman ! 
Idon. Nay, it was my duty 
Thus much to speak ; but think not I forget — 
Dear Father ! how could I forget and live — 
You and the story of that doleful night 
When, Antioch blazing to her topmost towers, 
You rushed into the murderous flames, returned 
Blind as the grave, but, as you oft have told me, 
Clasping your infant Daughter to your heart. 
Her. Thy Mother too ! — scarce had I gained the 
door, 
I caught her voice ; she threw herself upon me, 
I felt thy infant brother in her arms ; 
She saw my blasted face — a tide of soldiers 
That instant rushed between us, and I heard 
Her last death- shriek, distinct among a thousand. 
Idon. Nay, Father, stop not ; let me hear it alL 
Her. Dear Daughter ! precious relic of that time — 
For my old age, it doth remain with thee 
To make it what thou wilt. Thou hast been told, 
That when, on our return from Palestine, 
I found how my domains had been usurped, 
I took thee in my arms, and we began 
Our wanderings together. Providence 
At length conducted us to Rossland, — there, 
Our melancholy story moved a Stranger 
To take thee to her home — and for myself, 
Soon after, the good Abbot of St. Cuthbert's 
Supplied my helplessness with food and raiment, 
And, as thou know'st, gave me that humble Cot 
Where now we dwell. — For many years I bore 
Thy absence, till old age and fresh infirmities 
Exacted thy return, and our reunion. 
I did not think that, during that long absence, 
My Child, forgetful of the name of Herbert, 
Had given her love to a wild Freebooter, 
Who here, upon the borders of the Tweed, 
Doth prey alike on two distracted Countries, 
Traitor to both. 
Idon. Oh, could you bear his voice ! 
I will not call on Heaven to vouch for me, 
But let this kiss speak what is in my heart. 
Enter a Peasant. 
Pea. Good morrow, Strangers ! If you want a 
Guide, 
Let me have leave to serve you ! 
Id on. My Companion 
Hath need of rest ; the sight of Hut or Hostel 
Would be most welcome. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Pea. Yon white hawthorn gained, 
You will look down into a dell, and there 
Will see an ash from which a sign-board hangs ; 
The house is hidden by the shade. Old Man, 
You seem worn out with travel — shall I support you? 
Her. I thank you ; but, a resting-place so near, 
'Twere wrong to trouble you. 
Pea. God speed you both. 
[Exit Peasant. 
Her. Idonea, we must part. Be not alarmed — 
'Tis but for a few days — a thought has struck me. 
Idem. That I should leave you at this house, and 
thence 
Proceed alone. It shall be so ; for strength 
Would fail you ere our journey's end be reached. 
[Exit Herbert supported by Idonea. 
Re-enter Marmaduke and Oswald. 
Mar. This instant will we stop him 
Osw. Be not hasty, 
For, sometimes, in despite of my conviction, 
He tempted me to think the Story true ; 
'Tis plain he loves the Maid, and what he said 
That savoured of aversion to thy name 
Appeared the genuine colour of his soul — 
Anxiety lest mischief should befal her 
After his death. 
Mar. I have been much deceived. 
Osiv. But sure he loves the Maiden, and never love 
Could find delight to nurse itself so strangely, 
Thus to torment her with inventions ! — death — 
There must be truth in this. 
Mar. Truth in his story ! 
He must have felt it then, known what it was, 
And in such wise to rack her gentle heart 
Had been a tenfold cruelty. 
Osw. Strange pleasures 
Do we poor mortals cater for ourselves ! 
To see him thus provoke her tenderness 
With tales of weakness and infirmity ! 
I 'd wager on his life for twenty years. 
Mar. We will not waste an hour in such a cause. 
Osw. Why, this is noble ! shake her off at once. 
Mar. Her virtues are his instruments. — A Man 
Who has so practised on the world's cold sense, 
May well deceive his Child — what ! leave her thus, 
A prey to a deceiver ? — no — no — no — 
'Tis but a word and then 
Osw. Something is here 
More than we see, or whence this strong aversion? 
Marmaduke ! I suspect unworthy tales 
Have reached his ear — you have had enemies. 
Mar. Enemies ! — of his own coinage. 
Osw. That may be, 
But wherefore slight protection such as you 

Have power to yield ? perhaps he looks elsewhere. — 
I am perplexed. 
Mar. What hast thou heard or seen ? 
Osw. No — no — the thing stands clear of mystery ; 
(As you have said) he coins himself the slander 
With which he taints her ear ; — for a plain reason ; 
He dreads the presence of a virtuous man 
Like you ; he knows your eye would search his 
heart, 
Your justice stamp upon his evil deeds 
The punishment they merit. All is plain : 
It cannot be 
Mar. What cannot be? 
Osw. Yet that a Father 
Should in his love admit no rivalship, 
And torture thus the heart of his own Child 
Mar. Nay, you abuse my friendship ! 
Osw. Heaven forbid ! — 
There was a circumstance, trifling indeed — 
It struck me at the time — yet I believe 
I never should have thought of it again 
But for the scene which we by chance have wit- 
nessed. 
Mar. What is your meaning ? 
Osw. Two days gone I saw, 
Though at a distance and he was disguised, 
Hovering round Herbert's door,a man whose figure 
Resembled much that cold voluptuary, 
The villain, Clifford. He hates you, and he knows 
Where he can stab you deepest. 
Mar. Clifford never 
Would stoop to skulk about a Cottage door — 
It could not be. 
Osvj. And yet I now remember, 
That, when your praise was warm upon my tongue, 
And the blind Man was told how you had rescued 
A maiden from the ruffian violence 
Of this same Clifford, he became impatient 
And would not hear me. 
Mar. No — it cannot be — 
I dare not trust myself with such a thought — 
Yet whence this strange aversion ? You are a man 
Not used to rash conjectures 
Osiv. If you deem it 
A thing worth further notice, we must act 
With caution, sift the matter artfully. 
[Exeunt Marmaduke and Oswald. 

Scene, the door of the Hostel. 
Herbert, Idonea, and Host. 
Her. (seated). As I am dear to you, remember, 
Child ! 
This last request. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Idem. You know me, Sire ; farewell ! 
Her. And are you going then ? Come, come, 
Idonea, 
We must not part, — I have measured many a league 
When these old limbs had need of rest, — and now 
I will not play the sluggard. 
Idon. Nay, sit down. 
[Turning to Host. 
Good Host, such tendance as you would expect 
From your own Children, if yourself were sick, 
Let this old Man find at your hands ; poor Leader, 
[Looking at the dog. 
We soon shall meet again. If thou neglect 
This charge of thine, then ill befal thee ! — Look, 
The little fool is loth to stay behind. 
Sir Host ! by all the love you bear to courtesy, 
Take care of him, and feed the truant well. 
Host. Fear not, I will obey you ; — but One so 
young, 
And One so fair, it goes against my heart 
That you should travel unattended, Lady! — 
I have a palfrey and a groom : the lad 
Shall squire you, (would it not be better, Sir ?) 
And for less fee than I would let him run 
For any lady I have seen this twelvemonth. 
Idon. You know, Sir, I have been too long your 
guard 
Not to have learnt to laugh at little fears. 
Why, if a wolf should leap from out a thicket, 
A look of mine would send him scouring back, 
Unless I differ from the thing I am 
When you axe by my side. 
Her. Idonea, wolves 
Are not the enemies that move my fears. 
Idon. No more, I pray, of this. Three days at 
farthest 
Will bring me back — protect him, Saints — farewell ! 
[Exit Idonea. 
Host. 'Tis never drought with us — St. Cuthbert 
and his Pilgrims, 
Thanks to them, are to us a stream of comfort : 
Pity the Maiden did not wait a while ; 
She could not, Sir, have failed of company. 
Her. Now she is gone, I fain would call her back. 
Host (calling) . Holla ! 
Her. No, no, the business must be done. — 
What means this riotous noise ? 
Host. The villagers 
Are flocking in — a wedding festival — 
That 's all — God save you, Sir. 
Enter Oswald. 
Osw. Ha ! as I live, 
The Baron Herbert. 
Host. Mercy, the Baron Herbert ! 

Osw. So far into your journey ! on my life, 
You are a lusty Traveller. But how fare you ? 
Her. Well as the wreck I am permits. And 
you, Sir ? 
Osw. I do not see Idonea. 
Her. Dutiful Girl, 
She is gone before, to spare my weariness. 
But what has brought you hither \ 
Osw. A slight affair, 
That will be soon despatched. 
Her. Did Marmaduke 
Receive that letter ? 
Osw. Be at peace. — The tie 
Is broken, you will hear no more of him. 
Her. This is true comfort, thanks a thousand 
times ! — 
That noise ! — would I had gone with her as far 
As the Lord Clifford's Castle : I have heard 
That, in his milder moods, he has expressed 
Compassion for me. His influence is great 
With Henry, our good King ; — the Baron might 
Have heard my suit, and urged my plea at Court. 
No matter — he 's a dangerous Man. — That noise! — 
'Tis too disorderly for sleep or rest. 
Idonea would have fears for me, — the Convent 
Will give me quiet lodging. You have a boy, good 
Host, 
And he must lead me back. 
Osw. You are most lucky ; 
I have been waiting in the wood hard by 
For a companion — here he comes ; our journey 
Enter Marmaduke. 
Lies on your way ; accept us as your Guides. 
Her. Alas ! I creep so slowly. 
Osio. Never fear ; 
We ' not complain of that. 
Her. My limbs are stiff 
And need repose. Could you but wait au hour ? 
Osw. Most willingly ! — Come, let me lead you in, 
And, while you take your rest, think not of us ; 
We ' stroll into the wood ; lean on my arm. 
[Conducts Herbert into the house- Exit Marmaduke. 
Enter Villagers. 
Osio. (to himself coming out of the Hostel). I have 
prepared a most apt Instrument — 
The Vagrant must, no doubt, be loitering some- 
where 
About this ground ; she hath a tongue well skilled, 
By mingling natural matter of her own 
With all the daring fictions I have taught her, 
To win belief, such as my plot requires. 
[Exit Oswald. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Enter more Villagers, a Musician among them. 
Host (to them). Into the court, my Friend, and 
perch yourself 
Aloft upon the elm-tree. Pretty Maids, 
Garlands and flowers, and cakes and merry thoughts, 
Are here, to send the sun into the west 
More speedily than you belike would wish. 

Scene changes to the Wood adjoining the Hostel — 
Marmaduke and Oswald entering. 
Mar. I would fain hope that we deceive ourselves: 
When first I saw him sitting there, alone, 
It struck upon my heart I know not how. 
Osiv. To-day will clear up all. — You marked a 
Cottage, 
That ragged Dwelling, close beneath a rock 
By the brook-side : it is the abode of One, 
A Maiden innocent till ensnared by Clifford, 
Who soon grew weary of her ; but, alas ! 
What she had seen and suffered turned her brain. 
Cast off by her Betrayer, she dwells alone, 
Nor moves her hands to any needful work: 
She eats her food which every day the peasants 
Bring to her hut ; and so the Wretch has lived 
Ten years ; and no one ever heard her voice ; 
But every night at the first stroke of twelve 
She quits her house, and, in the neighbouring 
Churchyard 
Upon the self-same spot, in rain or storm, 
She paces out the horn.' 'twixt twelve and one — 
She paces round and round an Infant's grave, 
And in the churchyard sod her feet have worn 
A hollow ring ; they say it is knee-deep 
Ah ! what is here \ 
[A female Beggar rises up, rubbing her eyes as if in 
sleep — a Child in her arms. 
Beg. Oh ! Gentlemen, I thank you \ 
I 've had the saddest dream that ever troubled 
The heart of living creatui'e. — My poor Babe 
Was crying, as I thought, crying for bread 
When I had none to give him ; whereupon, 
I put a slip of foxglove in his hand, 
Which pleased him so, that he was hushed at once : 
When, into one of those same spotted bells 
A bee came darting, which the Child with joy 
Imprisoned there, and held it to his ear, 
And suddenly grew black, as he would die. 
Mar. We have no time for this, my babbling 
Gossip ; 
Here's what will comfort you. [Gives her money. 
Beg. The Saints reward you 
For this good deed ! — Well, Sirs, this passed away ; 

And afterwards I fancied, a strange dog, 
Trotting alone along the beaten road, 
Came to my child as by my side he slept 
And, fondling, licked his face, then on a sudden 
Snapped fierce to make a morsel of his head : 
But here he is, [hissing the Child] it must have 
been a dream. 
Osw. When next inclined to sleep, take my advice, 
And put your head, good Woman, under cover. 
Beg. Oh, sir, you would not talk thus, if you knew 
What life is this of ours, how sleep will master 
The weary-worn. — You gentlefolk have got 
Warm chambers to your wish. I 'd rather be 
A stone than what I am. — But two nights gone, 
The darkness overtook me — wind and rain 
Beat hard upon my head — and yet I saw 
A glow-worm, through the covert of the furze, 
Shine calmly as if nothing ailed the sky : 
At which I half accused the God in Heaven. — 
You must forgive me. 
Osw. Ay, and if you think 
The Fames are to blame, and you should chide 
Your favourite saint — no matter — this good day 
Has made amends. 
Beg. Thanks to you both ; but, sir ! 
How would you like to travel on whole hours 
As I have done, my eyes upon the ground, 
Expecting still, I knew not how, to find 
A piece of money glittering through the dust. 
Mar. This woman is a prater. Pray, good Lady ! 
Do you tell fortunes ? 
Beg. Oh Sir, you are like the rest. 
This Little-one — it cuts me to the heart — 
Well ! they might turn a beggar from their doors, 
But there are Mothers who can see the Babe 
Here at my breast, and ask me where I bought it: 
This they can do, and look upon my face — 
But you, Sir, should be kinder. 
Mar. Come hither, Fathers, 
And learn what nature is from this poor Wretch ! 
Beg. Ay, Sir, there's nobody that feels for us. 
Why now — but yesterday I overtook 
A blind old Greybeard and accosted him, 
I' th' name of all the Saints, and by the Mass 
He should have used me better ! — Charity ! 
If you can melt a rock, he is your man ; 
But I ' be even with him — here again 
Have I been waiting for him. 
Osw. Well, but softly, 
Who is it that hath wronged you \ 
Beg. Mark you me ; 
I'll point him out ; — a Maiden is his guide, 
Lovely as Spring's first rose ; a little dog, 
Tied by a woollen cord, moves on before 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

With look as sad as he were dumh ; the cur, 
I owe him no ill will, but in good sooth 
He does his Master credit. 
Mar. As I live, 
'Tis Herbert and no other ! 
Beg. 'Tis a feast to see him, 
Lank as a ghost and tall, his shoulders bent, 
And long beard white with age — yet evermore, 
As if he were the only Saint on earth, 
He turns his face to heaven. 
Osw. But why so violent 
Against this venerable Man ? 
Beg. I'll tell you : 
He has the very hardest heart on earth ; 
I had as lief turn to the Friar's school 
And knock for entrance, in mid holiday. 
Mar. But to your story. 
Beg. I was saying, Sir — 
Well ! — he has often spurned me like a toad, 
But yesterday was worse than all ; — at last 
I overtook him, Sirs, my Babe and I, 
And begged a little aid for charity : 
But he was snappish as a cottage cur. 
Well then, says I — I ' out with it ; at which 
I cast a look upon the Girl, and felt 
As if my heart would burst ; and so I left him. 
Osw. I think, good Woman, you are the very person 
Whom, but some few days past, I saw in Eskdale, 
At Herbert's door. 
Beg. Ay ; and if truth were known 
I have good business there. 
Osw. I met you at the threshold, 
And he seemed angry. 
Beg. Angry ! well he might ; 
And long as I can stir I ' dog him. — Yesterday, 
To serve me so, and knowing that he owes 
The best of all he has to me and mine. 
But 'tis all over now. — That good old Lady 
Has left a power of riches ; and I say it, 
If there's a lawyer in the land, the knave 
Shall give me half. 
Osw. What 's this ? — I fear, good Woman, 
You have been insolent. 
Beg. And there 's the Baron, 
I spied him skulking in his peasant's dress. 
Osw. How say you  in disguise % — 
Mar. But what's your business 
With Herbert or his Daughter ? 
Beg. Daughter ! truly — 
But how 's the day ? — I fear, my little Boy, 
We've overslept ourselves. — Sirs, have you seen 
him ? [.Offers to go. 
Mar. I must have more of this ; — you shall not 
stir 

An inch, till I am answered. Know you aught 
That doth concern this Herbert ? 
Beg, You are provoked, 
And will misuse me, Sir ! 
Mar. No trifling, Woman ! — 
Osw. You are as safe as in a sanctuary ; 
Speak. 
Mar. Speak ! 
Beg. He is a most hard-hearted Man. 
Mar. Your life is at my mercy. 
Beg. Do not harm me, 
And I will tell you all ! — You know not, Sir, 
What strong temptations press upon the Poor. 
Osw. Speak out. 
Beg. Oh Sir, I 've been a wicked Woman. 
Osw. Nay, but speak out ! 
Beg. He flattered me, and said 
What harvest it would bring us both ; and so, 
I parted with the Child. 
Mar. Parted with whom  
Beg. Idonea, as he calls her ; but the Girl 
Is mine. 
Mar. Yours, Woman ! are you Herbert's wife ? 
Beg. Wife, Sir ! his wife — not I ; my husband, 
Sir, 
Was of Kirkoswald — many a snowy winter 
We 've weathered out together. My poor Gilfred ! 
He has been two years in his grave. 
Mar. Enough. 
Osw. We 've solved the riddle — Miscreant ! 
Mar. Do you, 
Good Dame, repair to Liddesdale and wait 
For my return ; be sure you shall have justice. 
Osw. A lucky woman ! — go, you have done good 
service. [Aside. 
Mar. (to himself). Eternal praises on the power 
that saved her ! — 
Osw. (gives her money). Here 's for your little 
boy — and when you christen him 
I ' be his Godfather. 
Beg. Oh Sir, you are merry with me. 
In grange or farm this Hundred scarcely owns 
A dog that does not know me. — These good Folks, 
For love of God, I must not pass their doors ; 
But I ' be back with my best speed : for you — 
God bless and thank you both, my gentle Masters. 
[Exit Beggar. 
Mar. (to himself). The cruel Viper ! — Poor de- 
voted Maid, 
Now I do love thee. 
Osw. I am thunderstruck. 
Mar. Where is she — holla ! 
[Calling to the Beggar, who returns ; he looks at her 
stedfastly. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

You are Idonea's Mother \ — 
Nay, be not terrified — it does me good 
To look upon you. 
Osw. (intermtpting). In a peasant's dress 
You saw, who was it \ 
Beg. Nay, I dare not speak ; 
He is a man, if it should come to his ears 
I never shall be heard of more. 
Osw. Lord Clifford ? 
Beg. What can I do ? believe me, gentle Sirs, 
I love her, though I dare not call her daughter. 
Osw. Lord Clifford — did you see him talk with 
Herbert ? 
Beg. Yes, to my sorrow — under the great oak 
At Herbert's door — and when he stood beside 
The blind Man — at the silent Girl he looked 
With such a look — it makes me tremble, Sir, 
To think of it. 
Osw. Enough ! you may depart. 
Mar. (to himself). Father! — to God himself we 
cannot give 
A holier name ; and, under such a mask, 
To lead a Spirit, spotless as the blessed, 
To that abhorred den of brutish vice ! — 
Oswald, the firm foundation of my life 
Is going from under me ; these strange discoveries — 
Looked at from every point of fear or hope, 
Duty, or love — involve, I feel, my ruin. 

ACT II. 

Scene, A Chamber in the Hostel — Oswald alone, 
rising from a Table on which he had been 
writing. 
Osw. They chose him for their Chief ! — what 
covert part 
He, in the preference, modest Youth, might take, 
I neither know nor care. The insult bred 
More of contempt than hatred ; both are flown ; 
That either e'er existed is my shame : 
'Twas a dull spark — a most unnatural fire 
That died the moment the air breathed upon it. 
— These fools of feeling are mere birds of winter 
That haunt some barren island of the north, 
Where, if a famishing man stretch forth his hand, 
They think it is to feed them. I have left .him 
To solitary meditation ;-— now 
For a few swelling phrases, and a flash 
Of truth, enough to dazzle and to blind, 
And he is mine for ever — here he comes. 

Enter Marmaduke. 
Mar. These ten years she has moved her lips 
all day 
And never speaks ! 
Osw. Who is it ? 
Mar. I have seen her. 
Osw. Oh ! the poor tenant of that ragged home- 
stead, 
Her whom the Monster, Clifford, drove to madness. 
Mar. I met a peasant near the spot ; he told me, 
These ten years she had sate all day alone 
Within those empty walls. 
Osw. I too have seen her ; 
Chancing to pass this way some six months gone, 
At midnight, I betook me to the Churchyard : 
The moon shone clear, the air was still, so still 
The trees were silent as the graves beneath them. 
Long did I watch, and saw her pacing round 
Upon the self-same spot, still round and round, 
Her lips for ever moving. 
Mar. At her door 
Rooted I stood ; for, looking at the woman, 
I thought I saw the skeleton of Idonea. 
Osw. But the pretended Father 
Mar. Earthly law 
Measures not crimes like his. 
Osw. We rank not, happily, 
With those who take the spirit of their rule 
From that soft class of devotees who feel 
Reverence for life so deeply, that they spare 
The verminous brood, and cherish what they spare 
While feeding on their bodies. Would that Idonea 
Were present, to the end that we might hear 
What she can urge in his defence ; she loves him. 
Mar. Yes, loves him ; 'tis a truth that multiplies 
His guilt a thousand-fold. 
Osw. 'Tis most perplexing : 
What must be done ? 
Mar, We will conduct her hither ; 
These walls shall witness it — from first to last 
He shall reveal him self. 
Osw. Happy are we, 
Who five in these disputed tracts, that own 
No law but what each man makes for himself ; 
Here justice has indeed a field of triumph. 
Mar. Let us begone and bring her hither ; — here 
The truth shall be laid open, his guilt proved 
Before her face. The rest be left to me. 
Osw. You will be firm : but though we well may 
trust 
The issue to the justice of the cause, 
Caution must not be flung aside ; remember, 
Yours is no common life. Self-stationed here. 
Upon these savage confines, we have seen you 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Stand like an isthmus 'twixt two stormy seas 
That oft have checked then' fury at your bidding. 
'Mid the deep holds of Solway's mossy waste, 
Your single virtue has transformed a Band 
Of fierce barbarians into Ministers 
Of peace and order. Aged men with tears 
Have blessed then' steps, the fatherless retire 
For shelter to their banners. But it is, 
As you must needs have deeply felt, it is 
In darkness and in tempest that we seek 
The majesty of Him who rules the world. 
Benevolence, that has not heart to use 
The wholesome ministry of pain and evil, 
Becomes at last weak and contemptible. 
Your generous qualities have won due praise, 
But vigorous Spirits look for something more 
Than Youth's spontaneous products ; and to-day 
You will not disappoint them ; and hereafter 
Mar. You are wasting words ; hear me then, 
once for all : 
You are a Man — and therefore, if compassion, 
Which to our kind is natural as life, 
Be known unto you, you will love this Woman, 
Even as I do ; but I should loathe the light, 
If I could think one weak or partial feeling 
Osw. You will forgive me 
" Mar. If I ever knew 
My heart, could penetrate its inmost core, 
'Tis at this moment. — Oswald, I have loved 
To be the friend and father of the oppressed, 
A comforter of sorrow ; — there is something 
Which looks like a transition in my soul, 
And yet it is not. — Let us lead him hither. 
Osw. Stoop for a moment ; 'tis an act of justice ; 
And where 's the triumph if the delegate 
Must fall in the execution of his office ? 
The deed is done — if you will have it so — 
Here where we stand — that tribe of vulgar wretches 
(You saw them gathering for the festival) 
Rush in — the villains seize us 
Mar. Seize ! 
Osw. Yes, they — 
Men who are little given to sift and weigh — 
Would wreak on us the passion of the moment. 
Mar. The cloud will soon disperse — farewell — 
but stay, 
Thou wilt relate the story. 
Osw. Am I neither 
To bear a part in this Man's punishment, 
Nor be its witness ? 
Mar. I had many hopes 
That were most dear to me, and some will bear 
To be transferred to thee. 
Osw. When I 'm dishonored ! 

Mar. I would preserve thee. How may this be 
done ? 
Osiv. By showing that you look beyond the instant. 
A few leagues hence we shall have open ground, 
And nowhere upon earth is place so fit 
To look upon the deed. Before we enter 
The barren Moor, hangs from a beetling rock 
The shattered Castle in which Clifford oft 
Has held infernal orgies — with the gloom, 
And very superstition of the place, 
Seasoning his wickedness. The Debauchee 
Would there perhaps have gathered the first fruits 
Of this mock Father's guilt. 
Enter Host conducting Herbert. 
Sost. The Baron Herbert 
Attends your pleasure. 
Osw. (to Host). We are ready — 
(to Herbert) Sir ! 
I hope you are refreshed. — I have just written 
A notice for your Daughter, that she may know 
What is become of you. — You ' sit down and 
sign it ; 
'Twill glad her heart to see her father's signature. 
[Gives the letter he had written. 
Her. Thanks for your care. 
[Sits down and writes. Exit Host. 
Osio. (aside to Marmaduke). Perhaps it would 
be useful 
That you too should subscribe your name. 
[Marmaduke overlooks Herbert — then writes — examines 
the letter eagerly. 
Mar. I cannot leave this paper. 
[He puts it up, agitated. 
Osw. (aside). Dastard ! Come. 
[Marmaduke goes towards Herbert and supports him — 
Marmaduke tremblingly beckons Oswald to take his 
place- 
Mar, (as he quits Herbert). There is a palsy 
in his limbs — he shakes. 
[Exeunt Oswald and Herbert — Marmaduke fol- 
lowing. 

Scene changes to a Wood — a Group of Pilgrims 
and Idonea with, them. 
First Pil. A grove of darker and more lofty 
shade 
I never saw. 
Sec. PH. The music of the birds 
Drops deadened from a roof so thick with leaves. 
Old Pil. This news ! It made my heart leap up 
with joy. 
Idon. I scarcely can believe it. 
Old Pil. Myself, I heard 
The Sheriff read, in open Court, a letter 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Which purported it was the royal pleasure 
The Baron Herbert, who, as was supposed, 
Had taken refuge in this neighbourhood, 
Should be forthwith restored. The hearing, Lady, 
Filled my dim eyes with tears.— When I returned 
From Palestine, and brought with me a heart, 
Though rich in heavenly, poor in earthly, comfort, 
I met your Father, then a wandering Outcast : 
He had a Guide, a Shepherd's boy ; but grieved 
He was that One so young should pass his youth 
In such sad service ; and he parted with him. 
We joined our tales of wretchedness together, 
And begged our daily bread from door to door. 
 talk familiarly to you, sweet Lady ! 
For once you loved me. 
Idon. You shall back with me 
And see your Friend again. The good old Man 
Will be rejoiced to greet you. 
Old Pil. It seems but yesterday 
That a fierce storm o'ertook us, worn with travel, 
In a deep wood remote from any town. 
A cave that opened to the road presented 
A friendly shelter, and we entered in. 
Idon. And I was with you % 
Old Pil. If indeed 'twas you — 
But you were then a tottering Little-one — 
We sate us down. The sky grew dark and darker: 
I struck my flint, and built up a small fire 
With rotten boughs and leaves, such as the winds 
Of many autumns in the cave had piled. 
Meanwhile the storm fell heavy on the woods ; 
Our little fire sent forth a cheering warmth 
And we were comforted, and talked of comfort ; 
But 'twas an angry night, and o'er our heads 
The thunder rolled hi peals that would have made 
A sleeping man uneasy in his bed. 
O Lady, you have need to love your Father. 
His voice — methinks I hear it now, his voice 
When, after a broad flash that filled the cave, 
He said to me, that he had seen his Child, 
A face (no cherub's face more beautiful) 
Revealed by lustre brought with it from Heaven ; 
And it was you, dear Lady ! 
Idon. God be praised, 
That I have been his comforter till now ! 
And will be so through every change of fortune 
And every sacrifice his peace requires. — 
Let us be gone with speed, that he may hear 
These joyful tidings from no lips but mine. 
\_Exeant Idonea and Pilgrims. 


Scene, the Area of a half-ruined Castle — on one 
side the entrance to a dune/eon — Oswald and 
Marmaduke pacing backwards and forwards. 
Mar. 'Tis a wild night. 
Osw. I 'd give my cloak and bonnet 
For sight of a warm fire. 
Mar. The wind blows keen ; 
My hands are numb. 
Osw. Ha ! ha ! 'tis nipping cold. 
[Blowing his fingers. 
I long for news of our brave Comrades ; Lacy 
Would drive those Scottish Rovers to their dens 
If once they blew a horn this side the Tweed. 
Mar. I think I see a second range of Towers ; 
This castle has another Area — come, 
Let us examine it. 
Osw. 'Tis a bitter night ; 
I hope Idonea is well housed. That horseman, 
Who at full speed swept by us where the wood 
Roared in the tempest, was within an ace 
Of sending to his grave our precious Charge : 
That would have been a vile mischance. 
Mar. It would. 
Osw. Justice had been most cruelly defrauded. 
Mar. Most cruelly. 
Osw. As up the steep we clomb, 
I saw a distant fire in the north-east ; 
I took it for the blaze of Cheviot Beacon : 
With proper speed our quarters may be gamed 
To-morrow evening. 
[Looks restlessly towards the mouth of the dungeon. 
Mar. When, upon the plank, 
I had led him 'cross the torrent, his voice blessed me : 
You could not hear, for the foam beat the rocks 
With deafening noise, — the benediction fell 
Back on himself ; but changed into a curse. 
Osw. As well indeed it might. 
Mar. And this you deem 
The fittest place  
Osw. (aside). He is growing pitiful. 
Mar. (listening). What an odd moaning that is ! — 
Osw. Mighty odd 
The wind should pipe a little, while we stand 
Cooling our heels hi this way ! — I ' begin 
And count the stars. 
Mar. (still listening). That dog of his, you are sure, 
Could not come after us — he must have perished ; 
The torrent would have dashed an oak to splinters. 
You said you did not like his looks — that he 
Would trouble us ; if he were here again, 
I swear the sight of him would quail me moie 
Than twenty armies. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Osw. How ? 
Mar. The old blind Man, 
When you had told him the mischance, was trou- 
bled 
Even to the shedding of some natural tears 
Into the torrent over which he hung, 
Listening in vain. 
Osiv. He has a tender heart ! 
[Oswald offers to go down into the dungeon. 
Mar. How now, what mean you ? 
Osiv. Truly, I was going 
To waken our stray Baron. Were there not 
A farm or dwelling-house within five leagues, 
We should deserve to wear a cap and bells, 
Three good round years, for playing the fool here 
In such a night as this. 
Mar. Stop, stop. 
Osw. Perhaps, 
You 'd better like we should descend together, 
And lie down by his side — what say you to it % 
Three of us— we should keep each other warm : 
I ' answer for it that our four-legged friend 
Shall not disturb us ; further I ' not engage ; 
Come, come, for manhood's sake ! 
Mar. These drowsy shiverings, 
This mortal stupor which is creeping over me, 
What do they mean ? were this my single body 
Opposed to armies, not a nerve would tremble : 
Why do I tremble now ? — Is not the depth 
Of this Man's crimes beyond the reach of thought ? 
And yet, in plumbing the abyss for judgment, 
Something I strike upon which turns my mind 
Back on herself, I think, again — my breast 
Concentres all the terrors of the Universe : 
I look at him and tremble like a child. 
Osw. Is it possible ? 
Mar. One thing you noticed not : 
Just as we left the glen a clap of thunder 
Burst on the mountains with hell-rousing force. 
This is a time, said he, when guilt may shudder ; 
But there 's a Providence for them who walk 
In helplessness, when innocence is with them. 
At this audacious blasphemy, I thought 
The spirit of vengeance seemed to ride the air. 
Osw. Why are you not the man you were that 
moment ? 
[He draws Marmaduke to the dungeon. 
Mar. You say he was asleep, — look at this arm, 
And tell me if 'tis fit for such a work. 
Oswald, Oswald ! [Leans upon Oswald. 
Osw. This is some sudden seizure ! 
Mar. A most strange faintness, — will you hunt 
me out 
A draught of water ? 

Osw. Nay, to see you thus 
Moves me beyond my bearing. — I will try 
To gain the torrent's brink. [Exit Oswald. 
Mar. {after a pause). It seems an age 
Since that Man left me. — No, I am not lost. 
Her. {at the mouth of the dungeon). Give me your 
hand ; where are you, Friends  and tell me 
How goes the night. 
Mar. 'Tis hard to measure time, 
In such a weary night, and such a place. 
Her. I do not hear the voice of my friend Oswald. 
Mar. A minute past, he went to fetch a draught 
Of water from the torrent. 'Tis, you ' say, 
A cheerless beverage. 
Her. How good it was in you 
To stay behind ! — Hearing at first no answer, 
I was alarmed. 
Mar. No wonder ; this is a place 
That well may put some fears into your heart. 
Her. Why so ? a roofless rock had been a com- 
fort, 
Storm-beaten and bewildered as we were ; 
And in a night like this, to lend your cloaks 
To make a bed for me ! — My Girl will weep 
When she is told of it. 
Mar. This Daughter of yours 
Is very dear to you. 
Her. Oh ! but you are young ; 
Over your head twice twenty years must roll, 
With all their natural weight of sorrow and pain, 
Ere can be known to you how much a Father 
May love his Child. 
Mar. Thank you, old Man, for this ! [Aside. 
Her. Fallen am I, and worn out, a useless Man; 
Kindly have you protected me to-night, 
And no return have I to make but prayers ; 
May you in age be blest with such a daughter ! — 
When from the Holy Land I had returned 
Sightless, and from my heritage was driven, 
A wretched Outcast — but this strain of thought 
Would lead me to talk fondly. 
Mar. Do not fear; 
Your words are precious to my ears ; go on. 
Her. You will forgive me, but my heart runs over. 
When my old Leader slipped into the flood 
And perished, what a piercing outcry you 
Sent after him. I have loved you ever since. 
You start — where are we ? 
Mar. Oh, there is no danger ; 
The cold blast struck me. 
Her. 'Twas a foolish question. 
Mar. But when you were an Outcast ? — Heaven 
is just ; 
Your piety would not miss its due reward ; 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

The little Orphan then would be your succour, 
And do good service, though she knew it not. 
Her. I turned me from the dwellings of my 
Fathers, 
Where none but those who trampled on my rights 
Seemed to remember me. To the wide world 
I bore her, in my arms ; her looks won pity ; 
She was my Raven in the wilderness, 
And brought me food. Have I not cause to love 
her ? 
Mar. Yes. 
Her. More than ever Parent loved a Child ? 
Mar. Yes, yes. 
Her. I will not murmur, merciful God ! 
I will not murmur ; blasted as I have been, 
Thou hast left me ears to hear my Daughter's voice, 
And arms to fold her to my heart. Submissively 
Thee I adore, and find my rest in faith. 
Enter Oswald. 
Osw. Herbert ! — confusion ! (aside). Here it 
is, my Friend, 
[Presents the Horn. 
A charming beverage for you to carouse, 
This bitter night. 
Her. Ha ! Oswald ! ten bright crosses 
I would have given, not many minutes gone, 
To have heard your voice. 
Osw. Your couch, I fear, good Baron, 
Has been but comfortless ; and yet that place, 
When the tempestuous wind first drove us hither, 
Felt warm as a wren's nest. You 'd better turn 
And under covert rest till break of day, 
Or till the storm abate. 
(To Marmaduke aside). He has restored you. 
No doubt you have been nobly entertained \ 
But soft ! — how came he forth \ The Night-mare 
Conscience 
Has driven him out of harbour  
Mar. ■ I believe 
You have guessed right. 
Her. The trees renew their murmur: 
Come, let us house together. 
[Oswald conducts him to the dungeon. 
Osw. (returns). Had I not 
Esteemed you worthy to conduct the affair 
To its most fit conclusion, do you think 
I would so long have struggled with my Nature, 
And smothered all that 's man in me ? — away ! — 
[Looking towards the dungeon. 
This man 's the property of him who best 
Can feel his crimes. I have resigned a privilege ; 
It now becomes my duty to resume it. 
Mar. Touch not a finger 

Osvj. What then must be done ? 
Mar. Which way soe'er I turn, I am perplexed. 
Osw. Now, on my life, I grieve for you. The 
misery 
Of doubt is insupportable. Pity, the facts 
Did not admit of stronger evidence ; 
Twelve honest men, plain men, would set us right; 
Their verdict would abolish these weak scruples. 
Mar. Weak ! I am weak — there does my tor- 
ment lie, 
Feeding itself. 
Osw. Verily, when he said 
How his old heart would leap to hear her steps, 
You thought his voice the echo of Idonea's. 
Mar. And never heard a sound so terrible. 
Osw. Perchance you think so now ? 
Mar. I cannot do it : 
Twee did I spring to grasp his withered throat, 
When such a sudden weakness fell upon me, 
I could have dropped asleep upon his breast. 
Osw. Justice — is there not thunder in the word ? 
Shall it be law to stab the petty robber 
Who aims but at our purse ; and shall this Par- 
ricide — 
Worse is he far, far worse (if foul dishonour 
Be worse than death) to that confiding Creature 
Whom he to more than filial love and duty 
Hath falsely trained — shall he fulfil his purpose ? 
But you are fallen. 
Mar. Fallen should I be indeed — 
Murder — perhaps asleep, blind, old, alone, 
Betrayed, in darkness ! Here to strike the blow — 
Away ! away ! [Flings away his sword. 
Osio. Nay, I have done with you : 
We ' lead him to the Convent. He shall live, 
And she shall love him. With unquestioned title 
He shall be seated in his Barony, 
And we too chant the praise of his good deeds. 
I now perceive we do mistake our masters, 
And most despise the men who best can teach us : 
Henceforth it shall be said that bad men only 
Are brave : Clifford is brave ; and that old Man 
Is brave. 
[Taking Marmaduke's sword and giving it to him. 
To Clifford's arms he would have led 
His Victim — haply to this desolate house. 
Mar. (advancing to the dungeon). It must be 
ended ! — 
Osw. Softly ; do not rouse him ; 
He will deny it to the last. He lies 
Within the Vault, a spear's length to the left. 
[Marmaduke descends to the dungeon. 
(Alone.) The Villains rose in mutiny to destroy me ; 
I could have quelled the CowaSrds, but this Stripling 

■ 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Must needs step in, and save my life. The look 
With which he gave the boon — I see it now ! 
The same that tempted me to loathe the gift. — 
For this old venerable Grey-beard — faith 
'Tis his own fault if he hath got a face 
Which doth play tricks with them that look on it : 
'Twas this that put it in my thoughts — that coun- 
tenance — 
His staff — his figure — Murder ! — what, of whom ? 
We kill a worn-out horse, and who but women 
Sigh at the deed ? Hew down a withered tree, 
And none look grave but dotards. He may live 
To thank me for this service. Rainbow arches, 
Highways of dreaming passion, have too long, 
Young as he is, diverted wish and hope 
From the unpretending ground we mortals tread ; — 
Then shatter the delusion, break it up 
And set him free. What follows ? I have learned 
That things will work to ends the slaves o' the world 
Do never dream of. I have been what he— 
This Boy — when he comes forth with bloody 
hands — 
Might envy, and am now, — but he shall know 
'What I am now — [ Goes and listens at the dungeon. 
Praying or parleying ? — tut ! 
Is he not eyeless ? He has been half-dead 
These fifteen years 
Enter female Beggar with two or three of her Companions. 
(Turning abruptly). Ha! speak — what Thing 
art thou ? 
(Recognises her). Heavens ! my good Friend ! 
[To her. 
Beg. Forgive me, gracious Sir ! — 
Osw. (to her companions). Begone, ye Slaves, or 
I will raise a whirlwind 
And send ye dancing to the clouds, like leaves. 
[They retire affrighted. 
Beg. Indeed we meant no harm ; we lodge 
sometimes 
In this deserted Castle — I repent me. 
[Oswald noes to the dungeon — listens— returns to 
the Beggar. 
Osw. Woman, thou hast a helpless Infant — keep 
Thy secret for its sake, or verily 
That wretched life of thine shall be the forfeit. 
Beg. I do repent me, Sir ; I fear the curse 
Of that blind Man. 'Twas not your money, sir 
Osw. Begone ! 
Beg. (going). There is some wicked deed in 
hand : [Aside. 
Would I could find the old Man and his Daughter. 
[Exit Beggar. 
Marmaduke re-enters from the dungeon. 
Osw. It is all over then ; — your foolish fears 

Are hushed to sleep, by your own act and deed, 
Made quiet as he is. 
Mar. Why came you down ? 
And when I felt your hand upon my arm 
And spake to you, why did you give no answer ? 
Feared you to waken him ? he must have been 
In a deep sleep. I whispered to him thrice. 
There are the strangest echoes in that place ! 
Osw. Tut ! let them gabble till the day of doom. 
Mar. Scarcely, by groping, had I reached the 
Spot, 
When round my wi'ist I felt a cord drawn tight, 
As if the blind Man's dog were pulling at it. 
Osw. But after that ? 
Mar. The features of Idonea 
Lurked in his face 
Osw. Psha ! Never to these eyes 
Will retribution show itself again 
With aspect so inviting. Why forbid me 
To share your triumph ? 
Mar. Yes, her very look, 
Smiling in sleep 
Osw. A pretty feat of Fancy ! 
Mar. Though but a glimpse, it sent me to my 
prayers. 
Osw. Is he alive ? 
Mar. What mean you \ who alive ? 
Osw. Herbert ! since you will have it, Baron 
Herbert ; 
He who will gain his Seignory when Idonea 
Hath become Clifford's harlot — is he living ? 
Mar. The old Man in that dungeon is alive. 
Osw. Henceforth, then, will I never in camp or 
field 
Obey you more. Your weakness, to the Band, 
Shall be proclaimed : brave Men, they all shall 
hear it. 
You a protector of humanity ! 
Avenger you of outraged innocence ! 
Mar. 'Twas dark — dark as the grave ; yet did 
I see, 
Saw him — his face turned toward me ; and I tell 
thee 
Idonea's filial countenance was there 
To baffle me — it put me to my prayers. 
Upwards I cast my eyes, and, through a crevice, 
Beheld a star twinkling above my head, 
And, by the living God, I could not do it. 
[Sinks exhausted. 
Osw. (to himself). Now may I perish if this turn 
do more 
Than make me change my course. 
(To Marmaduke.) Dear Marmaduke, 
My words were rashly spoken ; I recal them : 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

I feel my error ; shedding human blood 
Is a most serious thing. 
Mar. Not I alone, 
Thou too art deep in guilt. 
Osw. We have indeed 
Been most presumptuous. There is guilt in this, 
Else could so strong a mind have ever known 
These trepidations ? Plain it is that Heaven 
Has marked out this foul Wretch as one whose 
crimes 
Must never come before a mortal judgment-seat, 
Or be chastised by mortal instruments. 
Mar. A thought that 's worth a thousand 
worlds ! [Goes towards the dungeon. 
Osw. I grieve 
That, in my zeal, I have caused you so much pain. 
Mar. Think not of that ! 'tis over — we are safe. 
Osw. (as if to himself, yet speaking aloud). The 
truth is hideous, but how stifle it ? 
[Turning to Marmaduke. 
Give me your sword— nay, here are stones and 
fragments, 
The least of which would beat out a man's brains ; 
Or you might drive your head against that wall. 
No ! this is not the place to hear the tale : 
It should be told you pinioned in your bed, 
Or on some vast and solitary plain 
Blown to you from a trumpet. 
Mar. Why talk thus ? 
Whate'er the monster brooding in your breast 
I care not : fear I have none, and cannot fear 
[The sound of a horn is heard. 
That horn again — 'Tis some one of our Troop ; 
What do they here ? Listen ! 
Osw. What ! dogged like thieves ! 
Enter Wallace and Lacy, &c. 
Lacy. You are found at last, thanks to the 
vagrant Troop 
For not misleading us. 
Osw. (looking at Wallace). That subtle Grey- 
beard — 
I 'd rather see my father's ghost. 
Lacy (to Marmaduke). My Captain, 
We come by order of the Band. Belike 
You have not heard that Henry has at last 
Dissolved the Barons' League, and sent abroad 
His Sheriffs with fit force to reinstate 
The genuine owners of such Lands and Baronies 
As, in these long commotions, have been seized. 
His Power is this way tending. It befits us 
To stand upon our guard, and with our swords 
Defend the innocent. 
Mar. Lacy ! we look 
But at the surfaces of things ; we hear 

Of towns in flames, fields ravaged, young and old 
Driven out in troops to want and nakedness ; 
Then grasp our swords and rush upon a cure 
That flatters us, because it asks not thought : 
The deeper malady is better hid ; 
The world is poisoned at the heart. 
Lacy. What mean you ? 
Wal. (whose eye has been fixed suspiciously upon 
Oswald). Ay, what is it you mean ? 
Mar. Harkee, my Friends ; — 
[Appearing gay. 
Were there a Man who, being weak and helpless 
And most forlorn, should bribe a Mother, pressed 
By penury, to yield him up her Daughter, 
A little Infant, and instruct the Babe, 
Prattling upon his knee, to call him Father 
Lacy. Why, if his heart be tender, that offence 
I could forgive him. 
Mar. (going on,). And should he make the Child 
An instrument of falsehood, should he teach her 
To stretch her arms, and dim the gladsome light 
Of infant playfulness with piteous looks 
Of misery that was not 
Lacy. Troth, 'tis hard — 
But in a world like ours 
Mar. (changing his tone). This self-same Man — 
Even while he printed kisses on the cheek 
Of this poor Babe, and taught its innocent tongue 
To lisp the name of Father — could he look 
To the unnatural harvest of that time 
When he should give her up, a Woman grown, 
To him who bid the highest in the market 
Of foul pollution ■ 
 Lacy. The whole visible world 
Contains not such a Monster ! 
Mar. For this purpose 
Should he resolve to taint her Soul by means 
Which bathe the limbs in sweat to think of them ; 
Should he, by tales which would draw tears from iron, 
Work on her nature, and so turn compassion 
And gratitude to ministers of vice, 
And make the spotless spirit of filial love 
Prime mover in a plot to damn his Victim 
Both soul and body 
Wal. 'Tis too horrible ; 
Oswald, wnat say you to it  
Lacy. Hew him down, 
And fling him to the ravens. 
Mar. But his aspect 
It is so meek, his countenance so venerable. 
Wal. (with an appearance of mistrust). But how, 
what say you, Oswald ? 
Lacy, (at the same moment). Stab him, were it 
Before the Altar. 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Mar. What, if he were sick, 
Tottering upon the very verge of life, 
And old, and blind 
Lacy. Blind, say you ? 
Osw. {coming forward). Are we Men, 
Or own we baby Spirits ? Genuine courage 
Is not an accidental quality, 
A thing dependent for its casual birth 
On opposition and impediment. 
Wisdom, if Justice speak the word, beats down 
The giant's strength ; and, at the voice of Justice, 
Spares not the worm. The giant and the worm — 
She weighs them in one scale. The wiles of woman, 
And craft of age, seducing reason, first 
Made weakness a protection, and obscured 
The moral shapes ot tnings. His tender cries 
And helpless innocence — do they protect 
The infant lamb ? and shall the infirmities, 
Which have enabled this enormous Culprit 
To perpetrate his crimes, serve as a Sanctuary 
To cover him from punishment ? Shame !— Justice, 
Admitting no resistance, bends alike 
The feeble and the strong. She needs not here 
Her bonds and chains, which make the mighty feeble. 
— We recognise in this old Man a victim 
Prepared already for the sacrifice. 
Lacy. By heaven, his words are reason ! 
Osw. Yes, my Friends, 
His countenance is meek and venerable ; 
And, by the Mass, to see him at his prayers ! — 
I am of flesh and blood, and may I perish 
When my heart does not ache to think of it ! — 
Poor Victim ! not a virtue under heaven 
But what was made an engine to ensnare thee ; ' 
But yet I trust, Idonea, thou art safe. 
Lacy. Idonea ! 
Wal. How ! what ? your Idonea ? 
[To Marmaduke. 
Mar. Mine j 
But now no longer mine. You know Lord Clifford ; 
He is the Man to whom the Maiden — pure 
As beautiful, and gentle and benign, 
And in her ample heart loving even me — 
Was to be yielded up. 
Lacy. Now, by the head 
Of my own child, this Man must die ; my hand, 
A worthier wanting, shall itself entwine 
In his grey hairs ! — 
Mar. (to Lacy). I love the Father in thee. 
You know me, Friends ; I have a heart to feel, 
And I have felt, more than perhaps becomes me 
Or duty sanctions. 
Lacy. We will have ample justice. 
Who are we, Friends \ Do we not live on ground 

Where Souls are self-defended, free to grow 
Like mountain oaks rocked by the stormy wind. 
Mark the Almighty Wisdom, which decreed 
This monstrous crime to be laid open — here, 
Where Reason has an eye that she can use, 
And Men alone are Umpires. To the Camp 
He shall be led, and there, the Country round 
All gathered to the spot, in open day 
Shall Nature be avenged. 
Osw. 'Tis nobly thought ; 
His death will be a monument for ages. 
Mar. (to Lacy). I thank you for that hint. He 
shall be brought 
Before the Camp, and would that best and wisest 
Of every country might be present. There, 
His crime shall be proclaimed ; and for the rest 
It shall be done as Wisdom shall decide : 
Meanwhile, do you two hasten back and see 
That all is well prepared. 
Wal. We will obey you. 
(Aside). But softly ! we must look a little nearer. 
Mar. Tell where you found us. At some future 
time 
 will explain the cause. [Exeunt. 

ACT III. 

Scene, the door of the Hostel, a group of Pilgrims as 
before; Idonea and the Host among them. 
Host. Lady, you'll find your Father at the Convent 
As I have told you : He left us yesterday 
With two Companions ; one of them, as seemed, 
His most familiar Friend. (Going.) There was a 
letter 
Of which I heard them speak, but that I fancy 
Has been forgotten. 
Idon. (to Host). Farewell ! 
Host. Gentle pilgrims, 
St. Cuthbert speed you on your holy errand. 
[Exeunt Idonea and Pilgrims. 

Scene, a desolate Moor. 
Oswald (alone). 
Osw. Carry him to the Camp ! Yes, to the Camp. 
Oh, Wisdom ! a most wise resolve ! and then, 
That half a word should blow it to the winds ! 
This last device must end my work. — Methinks 
It were a pleasant pastime to construct 
A scale and table of belief — as thus — 
Two columns, one for passion, one for proof ; 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Each rises as the other falls : and first, 
Passion a unit and against us — proof — 
Nay, we must travel in another path, 
Or we 're stuck fast for ever ;— passion, then, 
Shall be a unit for us ; proof — no, passion ! 
We'll not insult thy majesty by time, 
Person, and place — the where, the when, the how, 
And all particulars that dull brains require 
To constitute the spiritless shape of Fact, 
They bow to, calling the idol, Demonstration. 
A whipping to the Moralists who preach 
That misery is a sacred thing : for me, 
I know no cheaper engine to degrade a man, 
Nor any half so sure. This Stripling's mind 
Is shaken till the dregs float on the surface ; 
And, in the storm and anguish of the heart, 
He talks of a transition in his Soul, 
And dreams that he is happy. We dissect 
The senseless body, and why not the mind \ — 
These are strange sights — the mind of man, 
upturned, 
Is in all natures a strange spectacle ; 
In some a hideous one — hem ! shall I stop ? 
No. — Thoughts and feelings will sink deep, but then 
They have no substance. Pass but a few minutes, 
And something shall be done which Memory 
May touch, whene'er her Vassals are at work. 
Enter JVIarmaduke,/»-ow behind. 
Osw. (turning to meet Mm). But listen, for 
my peace 
Mar. Why, I believe you. 
Osw. But hear the proofs - 
Mar. Ay, prove that when two peas 
Lie snugly in a pod, the pod must then 
Be larger than the peas — prove this — 'twere matter 
Worthy the hearing. Fool was I to dream 
It ever could be otherwise ! 
Osw. Last night 
When I returned with water from the brook, 
I overheard the Villains — every word 
Like red-hot iron burnt into my heart. 
Said one, " It is agreed on. The blind Man 
Shall feign a sudden illness, and the Girl, 
Who on her journey must proceed alone, 
Under pretence of violence, be seized. 
She is," continued the detested Slave, 
u She is right willing — strange if she were not ! — 
They say, Lord Clifford is a savage man ; 
But, faith, to see him in his silken tunic, 
Fitting his low voice to the minstrel's harp, 
There's witchery in't. I never knew a maid 
That could withstand it. True," continued he, 
f When we arranged the affair, she wept a little 

(Not the less welcome to my Lord for that) 
And said, ' My Father he will have it so'. " 
Mar. I am your hearer. 
Osw. This I caught, and more 
That may not be retold to any ear. 
The obstinate bolt of a small iron door 
Detained them near the gateway of the Castle. 
By a dim lantern's light I saw that wreaths 
Of flowers were in their hands, as if designed 
For festive decoration ; and they said, 
With brutal laughter and most foul allusion, 
That they should share the banquet with their Lord 
And his new Favorite. 
Mar. Misery ! — 
Osw. I knew 
How you would be disturbed by this dire news, 
And therefore chose this solitary Moor, 
Here to impart the tale, of which, last night, 
I strove to ease my mind, when our two Comrades, 
Commissioned by the Band, burst in upon us. 
Mar. Last night, when moved to lift the avenging 
steel, 
I did believe all things were shadows — yea, 
Living or dead all things were bodiless, 
Or but the mutual mockeries of body, 
Till that same star summoned me back again. 
Now I could laugh till my ribs ached. Oh Fool ! 
To let a creed, built in the heart of things, 
Dissolve before a twinkling atom ! — Oswald, 
I could fetch lessons out of wiser schools 
Than you have entered, were it worth the pains. 
Young as I am, I might go forth a teacher, 
And you should see how deeply I could reason 
Of love in all its shapes, beginnings, ends ; 
Of moral qualities in their diverse aspects ; 
Of actions, and their laws and tendencies. 
Osw. You take it as it merits 
Mar. One a King, 
General or Cham, Sultan or Emperor, 
Strews twenty acres of good meadow-ground 
With carcases, in lineament and shape 
And substance, nothing differing from his own, 
But that they cannot stand up of themselves ; 
Another sits i' th' sun, and by the hour 
Floats kingcups in the brook — a Hero one 
We call, and scorn the other as Time's spend- 
thrift ; 
But have they not a world of common ground 
To occupy — both fools, or wise alike, 
Each in his way ? 
Osw. Troth, I begin to think so. 
Mar. Now for the corner-stone of my philosophy: 
I would not give a denier for the man 
Who, on such provocation as this earth 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Yields, could not chuck his habe beneath the chin, 
And send it with a fillip to its grave. 
Osw. Nay, you leave me behind. 
Mar. That such a One, 
So pious in demeanour ! in his look 
So saintly and so pure ! Hark'ee, my Friend, 
I ' plant myself before Lord Clifford's Castle, 
A surly mastiff kennels at the gate, 
And he shall howl and I will laugh, a medley 
Most tunable. 
Osw. In faith, a pleasant scheme ; 
But take your sword along with you, for that 
Might in such neighbourhood find seemly use. — 
But first, how wash our hands of this old Man \ 
Mar. Oh yes, that mole, that viper in the path ; 
Plague on my memory, him I had forgotten. 
Osw. You know we left him sitting — see him 
yonder. 
Mar. Ha ! ha ! — 
Osw. As 'twill be but a moment's work, 
I will stroll on ; you follow when 'tis done. 
[Exeunt. 

Scene changes to another part of the Moor at a short 
distance — Herbert is discovered seated on a stone. 
Her. A sound of laughter, too ! — 'tis well — I 
feared, 
The Stranger had some pitiable sorrow 
Pressing upon his solitary heart. 
Hush ! — 'tis the feeble and earth-loving wind 
That creeps along the bells of the crisp heather. 
Alas ! 'tis cold — I shiver in the sunshine — 
What can this mean ? There is a psalm that speaks 
Of God's parental mercies — with Idonea 
I used to sing it. — Listen !— what foot is there ? 
Enter Marmaduke. 
Mar. {aside— looking at Herbebt). And I have 
loved this Man ! and she hath loved him ! 
And I loved her, and she loves the Lord Clifford ! 
And there it ends ; — if this be not enough 
To make mankind merry for evermore, 
Then plain it is as day, that eyes were made 
For a wise purpose — verily to weep with ! 
[Looking round. 
A pretty prospect this, a masterpiece 
Of Nature, finished with most curious skill ! 
{To Herbert). Good Baron, have you ever 
practised tillage ? 
Pray tell me what this land is worth by the acre ? 
Her. How glad I am to hear your voice ! I know not 
Wherein I have offended you ; — last night 
I found in you the kindest of Protectors ; 

This morning, when I spoke of weariness, 
You from my shoulder took my scrip and threw it 
About your own ; but for these two hours past 
Once only have you spoken, when the lark 
Whirred from among the fern beneath our feet, 
And I, no coward in my better days, 
Was almost terrified. 
Mar. That 's excellent ! — 
So, you bethought you of the many ways 
In which a man may come to his end, whose crimes 
Have roused all Nature up against him — pshaw ! — 
Her. For mercy's sake, is nobody in sight ? 
No traveller, peasant, herdsman ? 
Mar. Not a soul : 
Here is a tree, ragged, and bent, and bare, 
That turns its goat's-beard flakes of pea-green moss 
From the stern breathing of the rough sea- wind ; 
This have we, but no other company : 
Commend me to the place. If a man should die 
And leave his body here, it were all one 
As he were twenty fathoms underground. 
Her. Where is our common Friend ? 
Mar. A ghost, methinks — 
The Spirit of a murdered man, for instance — 
Might have fine room to ramble about here, 
A grand domain to squeak and gibber in. 
Her. Lost Man ! if thou have any close-pent 
guilt 
Pressing upon thy heart, and this the hour 
Of visitation 
Mar. A bold word from you ! 
Her. Restore him, Heaven ! 
Mar. The desperate Wretch ! — A Flower, 
Fairest of all flowers, was she once, but now 
They have snapped her from the stem — Poll ! let 
her he 
Besoiled with mire, and let the houseless snail 
Feed on her leaves. You knew her well — ay, 
there, 
Old Man ! you were a very Lynx, you knew 
The worm was in her 
Her. Mercy ! Sir, what mean you ? 
Mar. You have a Daughter ! 
Her. Oh that she were here ! — 
She hath an eye that sinks into all hearts, 
And if I have in aught offended you, 
Soon would her gentle voice make peace between 
us. 
Mar. (aside). I do believe he weeps — I could 
weep too — 
There is a vein of her voice that runs through his : 
Even such a Man my fancy bodied forth 
From the first moment that I loved the Maid ; 
And for his sake I loved her more : these tears — 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

I did not think that aught was left in me 
Of what I have been — yes, I thank thee, Heaven ! 
One happy thought has passed across my mind.- 
— It may not be — I am cut off from man ; 
No more shall I be man — no more shall I 
Have human feelings !— {To Herbert) — Now, for 
a little more 
About your Daughter ! 
Her. Troops of armed men, 
Met in the roads, would bless us ; little children, 
Rushing along in the full tide of play, 
Stood silent as we passed them ! I have heard 
The boisterous carman, in the miry road, 
Check Ins loud whip and hail us with mild voice, 
And speak with milder voice to his poor beasts. 
Mar. And whither were you going ? 
Her. Learn, young Man, 
To fear the virtuous, and reverence misery, 
Whether too much for patience, or, like mine, 
Softened till it becomes a gift of mercy. 
Mar. Now, this is as it should be ! 
Her. I am weak ! — 
My Daughter does not know how weak I am ; 
And, as thou see'st, under the arch of heaven 
Here do I stand, alone, to helplessness, 
By the good God, our common Father, doomed ! — 
But I had once a spirit and an arm 
Mar. Now, for a word about your Barony : 
I fancy when you left the Holy Land, 
And came to — what 's your title — eh ? your claims 
Were undisputed ! 
Her. Like a mendicant, 
Whom no one comes to meet, I stood alone ; — 
I murmured — but, remembering Him who feeds 
The pelican and ostrich of the desert, 
From my own threshold I looked up to Heaven 
And did not want glimmerings of quiet hope. 
So, from the court I passed, and down the brook, 
Led by its murmur, to the ancient oak 
I came ; and when I felt its cooling shade, 
I sate me down, and cannot but believe — 
While in my lap I held my little Babe 
And clasped her to my heart, my heart that ached 
More with delight than grief — I heard a voice 
Such as by Cherith on Elijah called ; 
It said, " I will be with thee." A little boy, 
A shepherd-lad, ere yet my trance was gone, 
Hailed us as if he had been sent from heaven, 
And said, with tears, that he would be our guide : 
I had a better guide — that innocent Babe — 
Her, who hath saved me, to this hour, from harm, 
From cold, from hunger, penury, and death ; 
To whom I owe the best of all the good 
I have, or wish for, upon earth — and more 

And higher far than lies within earth's bounds : 
Therefore I bless her : when I think of Man, 
I bless her with sad spirit, — when of God, 
I bless her in the fulness of my joy ! 
Mar. The name of daughter in his mouth, he 
prays ! 
With nerves so steady, that the very flies 
Sit unmolested on his staff. — Innocent ! — 
If he were innocent — then he would tremble 
And be disturbed, as I am. [Turning aside). I 
have read 
In Story, what men now alive have witnessed, 
How, when the People's mind was racked with 
doubt, 
Appeal was made to the great Judge : the 
Accused 
With naked feet walked over burning ploughshares. 
Here is a Man by Nature's hand prepared 
For a like trial, but more merciful. 
Why else have I been led to this bleak Waste ? 
Bare is it, without house or track, and destitute 
Of obvious shelter, as a shipless sea. 
Here will I leave him — here — All-seeing God ! 
Such as he is, and sore perplexed as I am, 
I will commit him to this final Ordeal I — 
He heard a voice — a shepherd-lad came to him 
And was his guide ; if once, why not again, 
And in this desert ? If never — then the whole 
Of what he says, and looks, and does, and is, 
Makes up one damning falsehood. Leave him here 
To cold and hunger ! — Pain is of the heart, 
And what are a few throes of bodily suffering 
If they can waken one pang of remorse \ 
[Goes up to Herbert. 
Old Man ! my wrath is as a flame burnt out, 
It cannot be rekindled. Thou art here 
Led by my hand to save thee from perdition ; 
Thou wilt have time to breathe and think 
Her. Oh, Mercy ! 
Mar. I know the need that all men have of mercy, 
And therefore leave thee to a righteous judgment. 
Her. My Child, my blessed Child ! 
Mar. No more of that ; 
Thou wilt have many guides if thou art innocent ; 
Yea, from the utmost corners of the earth, 
That Woman will come o'er this Waste to save thee. 
[He pauses and looks at Herbert's staff. 
Ha ! what is here ? and carved by her own hand ! 
[Reads upon the stuff. 
" I am eyes to the blind, saith the Lord. 
He that puts his trust in me shall not fail !" 
Yes, be it so ; — repent and be forgiven — ■ 
God and that staff are now thy only guides. 
[He leaves Herbert on the Moor. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Scene, an eminence, a Beacon on the summit. 
Lacy, Wallace, Lennox, &c. &c. 
Several of the Band {confusedly). But patience ! 
One of the Band. Curses on that Traitor, 
Oswald ! — 
Our Captain made a prey to foul device ! — 
Len. (toWal.). His tool, the wandering Beggar, 
made last night 
A plain confession, such as leaves no douht, 
Knowing what otherwise we know too well, 
That she revealed the truth. Stand by me now ; 
For rather would I have a nest of vipers 
Between my breast-plate and my skin, than make 
Oswald my special enemy, if you 
Deny me your support. 
Lacy. We have been fooled — 
But for the motive ? 
Wal. Natures such as his 
Spin motives out of their own bowels, Lacy ! 
I learn'd this when I was a Confessor. 
I know him well ; there needs no other motive 
Than that most strange incontinence in crime 
Which haunts this Oswald. Power is life to him 
And breath and being ; where he cannot govern, 
He will destroy. 
Lacy. To have been trapped like moles ! — 
Yes, you are right, we need not hunt for motives : 
There is no crime from which this man would shrink ; 
He recks not human law ; and I have noticed 
That often when the name of God is uttered, 
A sudden blankness overspreads his face. 
Len. Yet, reasoner as he is, his pride has built 
Some uncouth superstition of its own. 
Wal. I have seen traces of it. 
Len. Once he headed 
A band of Pirates in the Norway seas ; 
And when the King of Denmark summoned him 
To the oath of fealty, I well remember, 
'Twas a strange answer that he made ; he said, 
"  hold of Spirits, and the Sun in heaven." 
Lacy. He is no madman. 
Wal. A most subtle doctor 
Were that man, who could draw the line that parts 
Pride and her daughter, Cruelty, from Madness, 
That should be scourged, not pitied. Restless 
Minds, 
Such Minds as find amid their fellow-men 
No heart that loves them, none that they can love, 
Will turn perforce and seek for sympathy 
In dim relation to imagined Beings. 
One of the Band. What if he mean to offer up 
our Captain 

An expiation and a sacrifice 
To those infernal fiends ! 
Wal. Now, if the event 
Should be as Lennox has foretold, then swear, 
My Friends, his heart shall have as many wounds 
As there are daggers here. 
Lacy. What need of swearing ! 
One of the Band. Let us away ! 
Another. Away ! 
A third. Hark ! how the horns 
Of those Scotch Rovers echo through the vale. 
Lacy. Stay you behind; and when the sun is down, 
Light up this beacon. 
One of the Band. You shall be obeyed. 
[They go out together. 



Scene, the Wood on the edye of the Moor. 
Marmaduke (alone). 
Mar. Deep, deep and vast, vast beyond human 
thought, 
Yet calm. — I could believe, that there was here 
The only quiet heart on earth. In terror, 
Remembered terror, there is peace and rest. 
Enter Oswald. 
Osw. Ha ! my dear Captain. 
Mar. A later meeting, Oswald, 
Would have been better timed. 
Osw. Alone, I see ; 
You have done your duty. I had hopes, which now 
I feel that you will justify. 
Mar. I had fears, 
From which I have freed myself — but 'tis my wish 
To be alone, and therefore we must part. 
Osw. Nay, then — I am mistaken. There's a 
weakness 
About you still ; you talk of solitude — 
I am your friend. 
Mar. What need of this assurance 
At any time ? and why given now ? 
Osiv. Because 
You are now in truth my Master ; you have 
taught me 
What there is not another living man 
Had strength to teach ; — and therefore gratitude 
Is bold, and would relieve itself by praise. 
Mar. Wherefore press this on me ? 
Osw. Because I feel 
That you have shown, and by a signal instance, 
How they who would be just must seek the rule 
By diving for it into then' own bosoms. 
To-day you have thrown off a tyranny 
That lives but in the torpid acquiescence 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Of our emasculated souls, the tyranny 
Of the world's masters, with the musty rules 
By which they uphold their craft from age to age : 
You have obeyed the only law that sense 
Submits to recognise ; the immediate law, 
From the clear tight of circumstances, flashed 
Upon an independent Intellect. 
Henceforth new prospects open on your path ; 
Your faculties should grow with the demand ; 
I still will be your friend, will cleave to you 
Through good and evil, obloquy and scorn, 
Oft as they dare to follow on your steps. 
Mar. I would be left alone. 
Osiv. (exultingly). I know your motives ! 
I am not of the world's presumptuous judges, 
Who damn where they can neither see nor feel, 
With a hard-hearted ignorance ; your struggles 
I witness'd, and now hail your victory. 
Mar. Spare me awhile that greeting. 
Osw. It may be, 
That some there are, squeamish half-thinking 
cowards, 
Who will turn pale upon you, call you murderer, 
And you will walk in solitude among them. 
A mighty evil for a strong-built mind ! — 
Join twenty tapers of unequal height 
And light them joined, and you will see the less 
How 'twill burn down the taller ; and they all 
Shall prey upon the tallest. Solitude ! — 
The Eagle lives in Solitude ! 
Mar. Even so, 
The Sparrow so on the house-top, and I, 
The weakest of God's creatures, stand resolved 
To abide the issue of my act, alone. 
Osw. Now would you ? and for ever ? — My young 
Friend, 
As time advances either we become 
The prey or masters of our own past deeds. 
Fellowship we must have, willing or no ; 
And if good Angels fail, slack in their duty, 
Substitutes, turn our faces where we may, 
Are still forthcoming ; some which, though they bear 
 names, can render no ill services, 
In recompense for what themselves required. 
So meet extremes in this mysterious world, 
And opposites thus melt into each other. 
Mar. Time, since Man first drew breath, has 
never moved 
With such a weight upon his wings as now ; 
But they will soon be lightened. 
Osw. Ay, look up — 
Cast round you your mind's eye, and you will learn 
Fortitude is the child of Enterprise : 
Great actions move our admiration, chiefly 

Because they carry in themselves an earnest 
That we can suffer greatly. 
Mar. Very true. 
Osw. Action is transitory — a step, a blow, 
The motion of a muscle — this way or that — 
'Tis done, and in the after-vacancy 
We wonder at ourselves like men betrayed : 
Suffering is permanent, obscure and dark, 
And shares the nature of infinity. 
Mar. Truth— and I feel it. 
Osw. What ! if you had bid 
Eternal farewell to unmingled joy 
And the light dancing of the thoughtless heart ; 
It is the toy of fools, and little fit 
For such a world as this. The wise abjure 
All thoughts whose idle composition lives 
In the entire forgetfulness of pain. 
— I see I have disturbed you. 
Mar. By no means. 
Osw. Compassion ! — pity !— pride can do without 
them ; 
And what if you should never know them more ! — 
He is a puny soul who, feeling pain, 
Finds ease because another feels it too. 
If e'er I open out this heart of mine 
It shall be for a nobler end — to teach 
And not to purchase puling sympathy. 
— Nay, you are pale. 
Mar. It may be so. 
Osw. Remorse — 
It cannot five with thought ; think on, think on, 
And it will die. What ! in this universe, 
Where the least things control the greatest, where 
The faintest breath that breathes can move a world ; 
What ! feel remorse, where, if a cat had sneezed, 
A leaf had fallen, the thing had never been 
Whose very shadow gnaws us to the vitals. 
Mar. Now, whither are you wandering ? That 
a man 
So used to suit his language to the time, 
Should thus so widely differ from himself — 
It is most strange. 
Osio. Murder ! — what 's in the word ! — 
I have no cases by me ready made 
To fit all deeds. Carry him to the Camp !— 
A shallow project ; — you of late have seen 
More deeply, taught us that the institutes 
Of Nature, by a cunning usurpation 
Banished from human intercourse, exist 
Only in our relations to the brutes 
That make the fields their dwelling. If a snake 
Crawl from beneath our feet we do not ask 
A license to destroy him : our good governors 
Hedge in the life of every pest and plague 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

That bears the shape of man ; and for what pur- 
pose, 
But to protect themselves from extirpation ? — ■ 
This flimsy barrier you have overleaped. 
Mar. My Office is fulfilled — the Man is now 
Delivered to the Judge of all things. 
Osio. Dead ! 
Mar. Ihavebornemy burthen to its destined end. 
Osw. This instant we ' return to our Com- 
panions — 
Oh how I long to see their faces again ! 
Enter Idonba, with Pilgrims who continue their journey. 
Idon. {after some time). What, Marmaduke ! 
now thou art mine for ever. 
And Oswald, too ! (To Marmaduke). On will we 
to my Father 
With the glad tidings which this day hath brought ; 
We ' go together, and, such proof received 
Of his own rights restored, his gratitude 
To God above will make him feel for ours. 
Osw. I interrupt you ? 
Idon. Think not so. 
Mar. Idonea, 
That I should ever live to see this moment ! 
Idon. Forgive me. — Oswald knows it all — he 
knows, 
Each word of that unhappy letter fell 
As a blood drop from my heart. 
Osw. 'Twas even so. 
Mar. I have much to say, but for whose ear ? — 
not thine. 
Idon. Ill can I bear that look — Plead for me, 
Oswald ! 
You are my Father's Friend. 
(To Marmaduke). • Alas, you know not, 
And never can you know, bow much he loved me. 
Twice had he been to me a father, twice 
Had given me breath, and was I not to be 
His daughter, once his daughter ? could I withstand 
His pleading face, and feel his clasping arms, 
And hear his prayer that I would not forsake him 
In his old age [Hides her face. 
Mar. Patience — Heaven grantme patience ! — 
She weeps, she weeps — my brain shall burn for hours 
Ere / can shed a tear. 
Idon. I was a woman ; 
And, balancing the hopes that are the dearest 
To womankind with duty to my Father, 
I yielded up those precious hopes, which nought 
On earth could else have wrested from me ; — if 
erring, 
Oh let me be forgiven ! 

Mar. I do forgive thee. 
Idon. But take me to your arms — this breast, 
alas ! 
It throbs, and you have a heart that does not feel it. 
Mar. (exultingly) . She is innocent. 
[He embraces her. 
Osw. (aside). Were I a Moralist, 
I should make wondrous revolution here ; 
It were a quaint experiment to show 
The beauty of trutb — [Addressing them. 
I see I interrupt you ; 
I shall have business with you, Marmaduke ; 
Follow me to the Hostel. [Exit Oswald. 
Idon. Marmaduke, 
This is a happy day. My Father soon 
Shall sun himself before his native doors ; 
The lame, the hungry, will be welcome there. 
No more shall he complain of wasted strength, 
Of thoughts that fail, and a decaying heart ; 
His good works will be balm and life to him. 
Mar. This is most strange ! — I know not what 
it was, 
But there was something which most plainly said, 
That thou wert innocent. 
Idon. How innocent ! — 
Oh heavens ! you 've been deceived. 
Mar. Thou art a Woman, 
To bring perdition on the universe. 
Idon. Already I 've been punished to the height 
Of my offence. [Smiling affectionately. 
I see you love me still. 
The labours of my hand are still your joy ; 
Bethink you of the hour when on your shoulder 
I hung this belt. 
[Pointing to the belt on which ivas suspended 
Herbert's scrip. 
Mar. Mercy of Heaven ! - [Sinks. 
Idon. What ails you ! [Distractedly. 
Mar. The scrip that held his food, and I forgot 
To give it back again ! 
Idon. What mean your words ? 
Mar. I know not what I said — all may be well. 
Idon. That smile hath life in it ! 
Mar. This road is perilous ; 
I will attend you to a Hut that stands 
Near the wood's edge — rest there to-night, I pray 
you : 
For me, I have business, as you heard, with Oswald, 
But will return to you by break of day. [Exeunt. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

ACT IV. 
Scene, A desolate prospect — a ridge of rocks — a 
Chapel on the summit of one — Moon behind the 
rocks — night stormy — irregular sound of a bell — ■ 
Herbert enters exhausted. 
Her. That Chapel-bell in mercy seemed to guide me, 
But now it mocks my steps ; its fitful stroke 
Can scarcely be the work of human hands. 
Hear me, ye Men, upon the cliffs, if such 
There be who pray nightly before the Altar. 
Oh that I had but strength to reach the place ! 
My Child — my child — dark — dark — I faint — this 
wind — 
These stifling blasts — God help me ! 
Enter Eldred. 
Eld. Better this bare rock, 
Though it were tottering over a man's head, 
Than a tight case of dungeon walls for shelter 
From such rough dealing. 
[_A moaning voice is heard. 
Ha ! what sound is that  
Trees creaking in the wind (but none are here) 
Send forth such noises — and that weary bell ! 
Surely some evil Spirit abroad to-night 
Is ringing it — 'twould stop a Saint in prayer, 
And that — what is it ? never was sound so like 
A human groan. Ha ! what is here ? Poor Man — 
Murdered ! alas ! speak— speak, I am your friend : 
No answer — hush — lost wretch, he lifts his hand 
And lays it to his heart — (Kneels to him). I pray 
you speak ! 
What has befallen you ? 
Her. (feebly). A stranger has done this, 
And in the arms of a stranger I must die. 
Eld. Nay, think not so : come, let me raise 
you up : [Raises him. 
This is a dismal place — well— that is well — 
I was too fearful — take me for your guide 
And your support — my hut is not far off. 
[Draws him gently off the stage. 

Scene, a room in the Hostel — Marmaduke and 
Oswald. 
Mar. But for Idonea ! — I have cause to think 
That she is innocent. 
Osw. Leave that thought awhile, 
As one of those beliefs which in their hearts 
Lovers lock up as pearls, though oft no better 
Than feathers clinging to their points of passion. 

This day's event has laid on me the duty 
Of opening out my story ; you must hear it, 
And without further preface. — In my youth, 
Except for that abatement which is paid 
By envy as a tribute to desert, 
I was the pleasure of all hearts, the darling 
Of every tongue — as you are now. You 've heard 
That I embarked for Syria. On our voyage 
Was hatched among the crew a foul Conspiracy 
Against my honour, in the which our Captain 
Was, I believed, prime Agent. The wind fell ; 
We lay becalmed week after week, until 
The water of the vessel was exhausted ; 
I felt a double fever in my veins, 
Yet rage suppressed itself ; — to a deep stillness 
Did my pride tame my pride ; — for many days, 
On a dead sea under a burning sky, 
I brooded o'er my injuries, deserted 
By man and nature ; — if a breeze had blown, 
It might have found its way into my heart, 
And I had been — no matter — do you mark me ? 
Mar. Quick — to the point — if any untold crime 
Doth haunt your memory. 
Osw., Patience, hear me further ! — 
One day in silence did we drift at noon 
By a bare rock, narrow, and white, and bare ; 
No food was there, no drink, no grass, no shade, 
No tree, nor jutting eminence, nor form 
Inanimate large as the body of man, 
Nor any living thing whose lot of life 
Might stretch beyond the measure of one moon. 
To dig for water on the spot, the Captain 
Landed with a small troop, myself being one : 
There I reproached him with his treachery. 
Imperious at all times, his temper rose ; 
He struck me ; and that instant had I killed him, 
And put an end to his insolence, but my Comrades 
Rushed in between us : then did I insist 
(All hated him, and I was stung to madness) 
That we should leave him there, alive ! — we did so. 
Mar. And he was famished ? 
Osw. Naked was the spot ; 
Methinks I see it now — how in the sun 
Its stony surface glittered hke a shield ; 
And in that miserable place we left him, 
Alone but for a swarm of minute creatures 
Not one of which could help him while alive, 
Or mourn him dead. 
Mar. A man by men cast off, 
Left without burial ! nay, not dead nor dying, 
But standing, walking, stretching forth his arms, 
In all things hke ourselves, but in the agony 
With which he called for mercy ; and — even so — 
He was forsaken ? 

a 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Osiv, There is a power in sounds : 
The cries he uttered might have stopped the boat 
That bore us through the water 
Mar. You returned 
Upon that dismal hearing — did you not ? 
Osvj. Some scoffed at him with hellish mockery, 
And laughed so loud it seemed that the smooth sea 
Did from some distant region echo us. 
Mar. We all are of one blood, our veins are filled 
At the same poisonous fountain ! 
Osw. 'Twas an island 
Only by sufferance of the winds and waves, 
Which with their foam could cover it at will. 
I know not how he perished ; but the calm, 
The same dead calm, continued many days. 
Mar. But his own crime had brought on him 
this doom, 
His wickedness prepared it ; these expedients 
Are terrible, yet ours is not the fault. 
Osio. The man was famished, and was innocent! 
Mar. Impossible ! 
Osw. The man had never wronged me. 
Mar. Banish the thought, crush it, and be at 
peace. 
His guilt was marked — these things could never be 
Were there not eyes that see, and for good ends, 
Where ours are baffled. 
Osw. I had been deceived. 
Mar. And from that hour the miserable man 
No more was heard of ? 
Os%v. I had been betrayed. 
Mar. And he found no deliverance ! 
Osw. The Crew 
Gave me a hearty welcome ; they had laid 
The plot to rid themselves, at any cost, 
Of a tyrannic Master whom they loathed. 
So we pursued our voyage : when we landed, 
The tale was spread abroad ; my power at once 
Shrunk from me ; plans and schemes, and lofty 
hopes — 
All vanished. I gave way — do you attend ? 
Mar. The Crew deceived you ? 
Osw. Nay, command yourself. 
Mar. It is a dismal night — how the wind howls ! 
Osw. I hid my head within a Convent, there 
Lay passive as a dormouse in mid winter. 
That was no life for me — I was o'erthrown, 
But not destroyed. 
Mar. The proofs — you ought to have seen 
The guilt — have touched it — felt it at your heart — 
As I have done. 
Osw. A fresh tide of Crusaders 
Drove by the place of my retreat : three nights 
Did constant meditation dry my blood ; 

Three sleepless nights I passed in sounding on, 
Through words and things, a dim and perilous way ; 
And, wheresoe'er I turned me, I beheld 
A slavery compared to which the dungeon 
And clanking chains are perfect liberty. 
You understand me — I was comforted ; 
I saw that every possible shape of action 
Might lead to good — I saw it and burst forth 
Thirsting for some of those exploits that fill 
The earth for sure redemption of lost peace. 
[Marking Marmaduke's countenance. 
Nay, you have had the worst. Ferocity 
Subsided in a moment, like a wind 
That drops down dead out of a sky it vexed. 
And yet I had within me evermore 
A salient spring of energy ; I mounted 
From action up to action with a mind 
That never rested — without meat or drink 
Have I lived many days — my sleep was bound 
To purposes of reason — not a dream 
But had a continuity and substance 
That waking life had never power to give. 
Mar. wretched Human-kind ! — Until the 
mystery 
Of all this world is solved, well may we envy 
The worm, that, underneath a stone whose weight 
Would crush the lion's paw with mortal anguish, 
Doth lodge, and feed, and coil, and sleep, in safety. 
Fell not the wrath of Heaven upon those traitors ? 
Osw. Give not to them a thought. From Palestine 
We marched to Syria : oft I left the Camp, 
When all that multitude of hearts was still, 
And followed on, through woods of gloomy cedar, 
Into deep chasms troubled by roaring streams ; 
Or from the top of Lebanon surveyed 
The moonlight desert, and the moonlight sea : 
In these my lonely wanderings I perceived 
What mighty objects do impress then.' forms 
To elevate our intellectual being ; 
And felt, if aught on earth deserves a curse, 
'Tis that worst principle of ill which dooms 
A thing so. great to perish self-consumed. 
— So much for my remorse ! 
Mar. Unhappy Man ! 
Osw. When from these forms I turned to con- 
template 
The World's opinions and her usages, 
I seemed a Being who had passed alone 
Into a region of futurity, 
Whose natural element was freedom 
Mar. Stop — 
I may not, cannot, follow thee. 
Osw. You must. 
I had been nourished by the sickly food 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

Of popular applause. I now perceived 
That we are praised, only as men in us 
Do recognise some image of themselves, 
An abject counterpart of what they are, 
Or the empty thing that they would wish to be. 
I felt that merit has no surer test 
Than obloquy ; that, if we wish to serve 
The world in substance, not deceive by show, 
We must become obnoxious to its hate, 
Or fear disguised in simulated scorn. 
Mar. I pity, can forgive, you ; but those 
wretches — ■ 
That monstrous perfidy ! 
Osiv. Keep down your wrath. 
False Shame discarded, spurious Fame despised, 
Twin sisters both of Ignorance, I found 
Life stretched before me smooth as some broad way 
Cleared for a monarch's progress. Priests might spin 
Theb veil, but not for me — 'twas in fit place 
Among its kindred cobwebs. I had been, 
And in that dream had left my native land, 
One of Love's simple bondsmen — the soft chain 
Was off for ever ; and the men, from whom 
This liberation came, you woidd destroy : 
Join me in thanks for their blind services. 
Mar. 'Tis a strange aching that, when we would 
curse 
And cannot. — You have betrayed me — I have 
done — ■ 
I am content — I know that he is guiltless — 
That both are guiltless, without spot or stain, 
Mutually consecrated. Poor old Man ! 
And I had heart for this, because thou lovedst 
Her who from very infancy had been 
Light to thy path, warmth to thy blood ! — Together 
[Turning to Oswald. 
We propped his steps, he leaned upon us both. 
Osw. Ay, we are coupled by a chain of adamant ; 
Let us be fellow-labourers, then, to enlarge 
Man's intellectual empire. We subsist 
In slavery ; all is slavery ; we receive 
Laws, but we ask not whence those laws have come ; 
We need an inward sting to goad us on. 
Mar. Have you betrayed me ? Speak to that. 
Osw. The mask, 
Which for a season I have stooped to wear, 
Must be cast off. — Know then that I was urged, 
(For other impulse let it pass) was driven, 
To seek for sympathy, because I saw 
In you a mirror of my youthful self ; 
I would have made us equal once again, 
But that was a vain hope. You have struck home, 
With a few drops of blood cut short the business ; 
Therein for ever you must yield to me. 

But what is done will save you from the blank 
Of living without knowledge that you live : 
Now you are suffering — for the future day, 
'Tis his who will command it. — Think of my story — 
Herbert is innocent. 
Mar. (in a faint voice, and doubtingly) You do 
but echo 
My own wild words ? 
Osto. Young Man, the seed must lie 
Hid in the earth, or there can be no harvest ; 
'Tis Nature's law. What I have done in darkness 
I will avow before the face of day. 
Herbert is innocent. 
Mar. What fiend could prompt 
This action \ Innocent ! — oh, breaking heart ! — 
Alive or dead, I ' find him. [Exit. 
.Osw. Alive — perdition ! [Exit. 

Scene, the inside of a poor Cottage. 
Eleanor and Idonea seated. 
Idon. The storm beats hard — Mercy for poor 
or rich, 
Whose heads are shelterless in such a night ! 
A Voice without. Holla ! to bed, good Folks, 
within ! 
Elea. O save us ! 
Idon. What can this mean ? 
Elea. Alas, for my poor husband ! — 
We ' have a counting of our flocks to-morrow ; 
The wolf keeps festival these stormy nights : 
Be calm, sweet Lady, they are wassailers 
[The voices die away in the distance. 
Returning from their Feast — my heart beats so — 
A noise at midnight does so frighten me. 
Idon. Hush ! [Listening. 
Elea. They are gone. On such a night, my 
husband, 
Dragged from Ms bed, was cast into a dungeon, 
Where, hid from me, he counted many years, 
A criminal in no one's eyes but theirs — 
Not even in theirs — whose brutal violence 
So dealt with him. 
Idon.  have a noble Friend 
First among youths of knightly breeding, One 
Who fives but to protect the weak or injured. 
There again ! [Listening. 
Elea. 'Tis my husband's foot. Good Eldred 
Has a kind heart ; but his imprisonment 
Has made him fearful, and he ' never be 
The man he was. 
Idon. I will retire ; — good night ! 
[She goes within. 

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Enter Eldred, (hides a bundle). 
Eld. Not yet in bed, Eleanor ! — there are stains 
in that frock which must be washed out. 
Meet. What has befallen you ? 
Eld.  am belated, and you must know the cause 
— {speaking low) that is the blood of an unhappy 
Man. 
Elect. Oh ! we are undone for ever. 
Eld. Heaven forbid that I should lift my hand 
against any man. Eleanor, I have shed tears to- 
night, and it comforts me to think of it. 
Elea. Where, where is he ? 
Eld. I have done him no harm, but it will 
be forgiven me ; it would not have been so once. 
Elea. You have not buried anything ? You are 
no richer than when you left me ? 
Eld. Be at peace ; I am innocent. 
Elea. Then God be thanked — 
[A short pause i she falls upon his neck. 
Eld. To-night I met with an old Man lying 
stretched upon the ground — a sad spectacle : I 
raised him up with a hope that we might shelter 
and restore him. 
Elea. (as if ready to run). Where is he? You 
were not able to bring him all the way with you ; 
let us return, I can help you. 
[Eldred shakes his head. 
Eld. He did not seem to wish for life : as I was 
struggling on, by the light of the moon I saw the 
stains of blood upon my clothes — he waved his 
hand, as if it were all useless ; and I let him sink 
again to the ground. 
Elea. Oh that I had been by your side ! 
Eld. I tell you his hands and his body were cold 
— how could I disturb his last moments ? he strove 
to turn from me as if he wished to settle into 
sleep. 
Elea. But, for the stains of blood — 
Eld. He must have fallen, I fancy, for his head 
was cut ; but I think his malady was cold and 
hunger. 
Elea. Oh, Eldred, I shall never be able to look 
up at this roof in storm or fair but I shall 
tremble. 
Eld. Is it not enough that my ill stars have kept 
me abroad to-night till this hour ? I come home, 
and this is my comfort ! 
Elea. But did he say nothing which might have 
set you at ease ? 
Eld. I thought he grasped my hand while he 
was muttering something about his Child — his 
Daughter — (starting as if he heard a noise). What 
is that ? 

Elea. Eldred, you are a father. 
Eld. God knows what was in my heart, and will 
not curse my son for my sake. 
Elea. But you prayed by him ? you waited the 
hour of his release ? 
Eld. The night was wasting fast ; I have no 
friend ; I am spited by the world — his wound 
terrified me — if I had brought him along with me, 
and he had died in my arms !  am sure I heard 
something breathing — and this chair ! 
Elea. Oh, Eldred, you will die alone. You will 
have nobody to close your eyes — no hand to grasp 
your dying hand — I shall be in my grave. A curse 
will attend us all. 
Eld. Have you forgot your own troubles when I 
was in the dungeon ? 
Elea. And you left him alive ? 
Eld. Alive ! — the damps of death were upon him 
■ — he could not have survived an hour. 
Elea. In the cold, cold night. 
Eld. (in a savage tone). Ay, and his head was 
bare ; I suppose you would have had me lend my 
bonnet to cover it. — You will never rest till I am 
brought to a felon's end. 
Elea. Is there nothing to be done ? cannot we go 
to the Convent? 
Eld. Ay, and say at once that I murdered 
him ! 
Elea. Eldred, I know that ours is the only house 
upon the Waste ; let us take heart ; this Man may 
be rich ; and could he be saved by our means, hia 
gratitude may reward us. 
Eld. 'Tis all in vain. 
Elea. But let us make the attempt. This old 
Man may have a wife, and he may have children 
— let us return to the spot ; we may restore 
him, and his eyes may yet open upon those that 
love him. 
Eld. He will never open them more ; even when 
he spoke to me, he kept them firmly sealed as 
if he had been blind. 
Idon. (rushing out). It is, it is, my Father — 
Eld. We are betrayed (looking at Idonea). 
Elea. His Daughter ! — God have mercy ! (turn- 
ing to Idonea). 
Idon. (sinking down). Oh ! lift me up and carry 
me to the place. 
You are safe ; the whole world shall not harm you. 
Elea. This Lady is his Daughter. 
Eld. (moved). I ' lead you to the spot. 
Idon. (springing up). Alive ! — you heard him 
breathe ? quick, quick — [Exeunt. 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

ACT V. 
Scene, A wood on the edge of the Waste. 
Enter Oswald and a Forester. 
For. Heleaneduponthebridgethatspanstheglen, 
And down into the bottom cast his eye, 
That fastened there, as it would check the current. 
Osw. He listened too ; did you not say he listened ? 
For. As if there came such moaning from the 
flood 
As is heard often after stormy nights. 
Osw. But did he utter nothing  
For. See him there ! 
Marmaduke appearing. 
Mar. Buzz, buzz, ye black and winged freebooters ; 
That is no substance which ye settle on ! 
For. His senses play him false ; and see, Ms arras 
Outspread, as if to save himself from falling ! — 
Some terrible phantom I believe is now 
Passing before him, such as God will not 
Permit to visit any but a man 
Who has been guilty of some horrid crime. 
[Marmaduke disappears. 
Osw. The game is up ! — 
For. If it be needful, Sir, 
I will assist you to lay hands upon him. 
Osw. No, no, my Friend, you may pursue your 
business — 
'Tis a poor wretch of an unsettled mind, 
Who has a trick of straying from his keepers ; 
We must be gentle. Leave him to my care. 
[Exit Forester. 
If his own eyes play false with him, these freaks 
Of fancy shall be quickly tamed by mine ; 
The goal is reached. My Master shall become 
A shadow of myself — made by myself. 

Scene, the edge of the Moor. 
Marmajduke and Eldred enter from opposite sides. 
Mar. (raising his eyes and perceiving Eldred). 
In any corner of this savage Waste, 
Have you, good Peasant, seen a blind old Man ? 
Eld. I heard 
Mar. You heard him, where ? when 
heard him  
Eld. As you know, 
The first hours of last night were rough with stonn : 
I had been out in search of a stray heifer ; 
Returning late, I heard a moaning sound ; 
Then, thinking that my fancy had deceived me, 
I hurried on, when straight a second moan, 

A human voice distinct, struck on my ear. 
So guided, distant a few steps, I found 
An aged Man, and such as you describe. 
Mar. You heard ! — he called you to him ? Of all 
men 
The best and kindest ! — but where is he  guide me, 
That I may see him. 
Eld. On a ridge of rocks 
A lonesome Chapel stands, deserted now : 
The bell is left, which no one dares remove ; 
And, when the stormy wind blows o'er the peak, 
It rings, as if a human hand were there 
To pull the cord. I guess he must have heard it ; 
And it had led him towards the precipice, 
To climb up to the spot whence the sound came ; 
But he had failed through weakness. From his 
hand 
His staff had dropped, and close upon the brink 
Of a small pool of water he was laid, 
As if he had stooped to drink, and so remained 
Without the strength to rise. 
Mar. Well, well, he lives, 
And all is safe : what said he ? 
Eld. But few words : 
He only spake to me of a dear Daughter, 
Who, so he feared, would never see him more ; 
And of a Stranger to him, One by whom 
He had been sore misused ; but he forgave 
The wrong and the wrong-doer. You are trou- 
bled— 
Perhaps you are his son ? 
Mar. The All-seeing knows, 
I did not think he had a living Child. — 
But whither did you carry him ? 
Eld. He was torn, 
His head was bruised, and there was blood about 
him 
Mar. That was no work of mine. 
Eld. Nor was it mine. 
Mar. But had he strength to walk ? I could have 
borne him 
A thousand miles. 
Eld. I am in poverty, 
And know how busy are the tongues of men ; 
My heart was willing, Sir, but I am one 
Whose good deeds will not stand by their own light; 
And, though it smote me more than words can tell, 
I left him. 
Mar. I believe that there are phantoms, 
That in the shape of man do cross our path 
On evil instigation, to make sport 
Of our distress — and thou art one of them ! 
But things substantial have so pressed on me 
Eld. My wife and children came into my mind. 

 


POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

Mar. Oh Monster ! Monster ! there are three 
of us, 
And we shall howl together. 
[After a pause and in a feeble voice. 
I am deserted 
At my worst need, my crimes have in a net 
(Pointing to Eldeed) Entangled this poor man. — 
Where was it ? where ? 
[Dragging him along. 
Eld. 'Tis needless ; spare your violence. His 
Daughter 
• Mar. Ay, in the word a thousand scorpions lodge: 
This old man had a Daughter. 
Eld. To the spot 
I hurried back with her. — save me, Sir, 
From such a journey ! there was a black tree, 
A single tree ; she thought it was her Father. — 
Oh Sir, I would not see-that hour again 
For twenty lives. The daylight dawned, and now — ■ 
Nay ; hear my tale, 'tis fit that you should hear it — 
As we approached, a solitary crow 
Rose from the spot ; — the Daughter clapped her 
hands, 
And then I heard a shriek so terrible 
[Marmaduke shri?iks back. 
The startled bird quivered upon the wing. 
Mar. Dead, dead ! — 
Eld. (after a pause). A dismal matter, Sir, forme, 
And seems the like for you ; if 'tis your wish, 
I ' lead you to his Daughter ; but 'twere best 
That she should be prepared ; I ' go before. 
Mar. There will be need of preparation. 
[Eldred goes off- 
Elea. (enters). Master ! 
Your limbs sink under you, shall I support you ? 
Mar. (talcing her arm). Woman, I 've lent my 
body to the service 
Which now thou tak'st upon thee. God forbid 
That thou shouldst ever meet a like occasion 
With such a purpose in thine heart as mine was. 
Elea. Oh, why have I to do with things like these? 
[Exeunt. 

Scene changes to the door of Eldred's cottage — 
Idonea seated — enter Eldred. 
Eld. Your Father, Lady, from a wilful hand 
Has met unkindness ; so indeed he told me, 
And you remember such was my report : 
From what has just befallen me I have cause 
To fear the very worst. 
Idon. My Father is dead ; 
Why dost thou come to me with words like these ? 
Eld. A wicked Man should answer for his crimes. 

Idon. Thou seest me what I am. 
Eld. It was most heinous, 
And doth call out for vengeance. 
Idon. Do not add, 
I prithee, to the harm thou 'st done already. 
Eld. Hereafter you will thank me for this service. 
Hard by, a Man I met, who, from plain proofs 
Of interfering Heaven, I have no doubt, 
Laid hands upon your Father. Fit it were 
You should prepare to meet him. 
Idon. I have nothing 
To do with others ; help me to my Father — 
[She turns and sees Marmaduke leaning on Eleanor 
— throws herself upon his neck, and after some 
time, 
In joy I met thee, but a few hours past ; 
And thus we meet again ; one human stay 
Is left me still in thee. Nay, shake not so. 
Mar. In such a wilderness — to see no thing, 
No, not the pitying moon ! 
Idon. And perish so. 
Mar. Without a dog to moan for him. 
Idon. Think not of it, 
But enter there and see him how he sleeps, 
Tranquil as he had died in his own bed. 
Mar. Tranquil — why not ? 
Idon. Oh, peace ! 
Mar. He is at peace ; 
His body is at rest : there was a plot, 
A hideous plot, against the soul of man : 
It took effect — and yet I baffled it, 
In some degree. 
Idon. Between us stood, I thought, 
A cup of consolation, filled from Heaven 
For both our needs ; must I, and in thy presence, 
Alone partake of it ? — Beloved Marmaduke ! 
Mar. Give me a reason why the wisest thing 
That the earth owns shall never choose to die, 
But some one must be near to count his groans. 
The wounded deer retires to solitude, 
And dies in solitude : all things but man, 
All die in solitude. 
[Moving towards the cottage door. 
Mysterious God, 
If she had never lived I had not done it ! — 
Idon. Alas, the thought of such a cruel death 
Has overwhelmed him. — I must follow. 
Eld. Lady ! 
You will do well ; (she goes) unjust suspicion may 
Cleave to this Stranger : if, upon his entering, 
The dead Man heave a groan, or from his side 
Uplift his hand — that would be evidence. 
Elea. Shame ! Eldred, shame ! 
Mar. (both returning) The dead have but 
one face, (to himself). 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

And such a Man — so meek and unoffending — 
Helpless and harmless as a babe : a Man, 
By obvious signal to the world's protection 
Solemnly dedicated — to decoy him ! — 
Idon. Oh, had you seen him living ! — 
Mar. I (so filled 
With horror is this world) am unto thee 
The thing most precious, that it now contains : 
Therefore through me alone must be revealed 
By whom thy Parent was destroyed, Idonea ! 
I have the proofs ! — 
Idon. miserable Father ! 
Thou didst command me to bless all mankind ; 
Nor to this moment, have I ever wished 
Evil to any living thing ; but hear me, 
Hear me, ye Heavens ! — (Jcneeling) — may venge- 
ance haunt the fiend 
For this most cruel murder : let him live 
And move in terror of the elements ; 
The thunder send him on his knees to prayer 
In the open streets, and let him think he sees, 
If e'er he entereth the house of God, 
The roof, self-moved, unsettling o'er his head ; 
And let him, when he would lie down at night, 
Point to his wife the blood-drops on his pillow ! 
Mar. My voice was silent, but my heart hath 
joined thee. 
Idon. (leaning on Marmaduke). Left to the 
mercy of that savage Man ! 
How could he call upon his Child ! — Friend ! 
[Turns to Makjiaduke. 
My faithful true and only Comforter. 
Mar. Ay, come to me and weep. (He Jcisses her.) 
(To Eldred). Yes, Varlet, look, 
The devils at such sights do clap their hands. 
[Eldred retires alarmed. 
Idon. Thy vest is torn, thy cheek is deadly pale ; 
Hast thou pursued the monster \ 
Mar. I have found him. — 
Oh ! would that thou hadst perished in the flames ! 
Idon. Here art thou, then can I be desolate ? — 
Mar. There was a time, when this protecting hand 
Availed against the mighty ; never more 
Shall blessings wait upon a deed of mine. 
Idon. Wild words for me to hear, for me, an 
orphan, 
Committed to thy guardianship by Heaven ; 
And, if thou hast forgiven me, let me hope, 
In this deep sorrow, trust, that I am thine 
For closer care ; — here, is no malady. 
[Taking his arm. 
Mar. There, is a malady — 
(Striking his heart and forehead) And here, and 
here, 

A mortal malady. — I am accurst : 
All nature curses me, and in my heart 
Thy curse is fixed ; the truth must be laid bare. 
It must be told, and borne. I am the man, 
(Abused, betrayed, but how it matters not) 
Presumptuous above all that ever breathed, 
Who, casting as I thought a guilty Person 
Upon Heaven's righteous judgment, did become 
An instrument of Fiends. Through me, through me . 
Thy Father perished. 
Idon. Perished — by what mischance ? 
Mar. Beloved ! — if I dared, so would I call thee — 
Conflict must cease, and, in thy frozen heart, 
The extremes of suffering meet in absolute peace. 
[lie gives her a letter. 
Idon. (reads) Be not surprised if you hear 
that some signal judgment has befallen the man 
who calls himself your father ; he is now with 
me, as his signature will shew : abstain from con- 
jecture till you see me. 
' Herbert. 
' Marmaduke.' 
The writing Oswald's ; the signature my Father's : 
(Looks steadily at the paper) And here is yours, — 
or do my eyes deceive me ? 
You have then seen my Father ? 
Mar. He has leaned 
Upon this arm. 
Idon. You led him towards the Convent ? 
Mar. That Convent was Stone-Arthur Castle. 
Thither 
We were his guides. I on that night resolved 
That he should wait thy coming till the day 
Of resurrection. 
Idon. Miserable Woman, 
Too quickly moved, too easily giving way, 
 put denial on thy suit, and hence, 
With the disastrous issue of last night, 
Thy perturbation, and these frantic words. 
Be calm, I pray thee ! 
Mar. Oswald 
Idon. Name him not. 
Enter female Beggar. 
Beg. And he is dead ! — that Moor — how shall 
I cross it ? 
By night, by day, never shall I be able 
To travel half a mile alone. — Good Lady ! 
Forgive me ! — Saints forgive me. Had I thought 
It would have come to this ! — 
Idon. What brings you hither ? speak ! 
Beg. (pointing to Marmaduke). This innocent 
Gentleman. Sweet heavens ! I told him 
Such tales of your dead Father ! — God is my judge, 
E  

 

POEMS WRITTEN IN YOUTH. 

I thought there was no harm : but that bad Man, 
He bribed me with his gold, and looked so fierce. 
Mercy ! I said I know not what — oh pity me — 
I said, sweet Lady, you were not his Daughter — 
Pity me, I am haunted ; — thrice this day 
My conscience made me wish to be struck blind ; 
And then I would have prayed, and had no voice. 
Idon. (to Marmadtjke). Was it my Father ? — 
no, no, no, for he 
Was meek and patient, feeble, old and blind, 
Helpless, and loved me dearer than his life. 
— But hear me. For one qiiestion, I have a heart 
That will sustain me. Did you murder him ? 
Mar. No, not by stroke of arm. But learn the 
process : 
Proof after proof was pressed upon me ; guilt 
Made evident, as seemed, by blacker guilt, 
Whose impious folds enwrapped even thse ; and truth 
And innocence, embodied in his looks, 
His words and tones and gestures, did but serve 
With me to aggravate his crimes, and heaped 
Ruin upon the cause for which they pleaded. 
Then pity crossed the path of my resolve : 
Confounded, I looked up to Heaven, and cast, 
Idonea ! thy blind Father, on the Ordeal 
Of the bleak Waste — left him — and so he died ! — 
[Idonea sinks senseless ; Beggar, Eleanor, fyc, 
crowd round, and bear her off. 
Why may we speak these things, and do no more ; 
Why should a thrust of the arm have such a power, 
And words that tell these things be heard in vain  
She is not dead. Why ! — if I loved this Woman, 
I would take care she never woke again ; 
But she will wake, and she will weep for me, 
And say, no blame was mine — and so, poor fool, 
Will waste her curses on another name. 
[He walks about distractedly. 
Enter Oswald. 
Oswald (to himself). Strong to o'erturn, strong 
also to buildup. [To Marmaduke. 
The starts and sallies of our last encounter 
Were natural enough ; but that, I trust, 
Is all gone by. You have cast off the chains 
That fettered your nobility of mind — 
Delivered heart and head ! 
Let us to Palestine ; 
This is a paltry field for enterprise. 
Mar. Ay, what shall we encounter next ? This 
issue — 
'Twas nothing more than darkness deepening 
darkness, 
And weakness crowned with the impotence of 
death ! — 
Your pupil is, you see, an apt proficient, (ironically) . 

Start not ! — Here is another face hard by ; 
Come, let us take a peep at both together, 
And, with a voice at which the dead will quake, 
Resound the praise of your morality — 
Of this too much. 
[Drawing Oswald towards the Cottage — stops short 
at the door. 
Men are there, millions, Oswald, 
Who with bare hands would have plucked out thy 
heart 
And flung it to the dogs : but I am raised 
Above, or sunk below, all further sense 
Of provocation. Leave me, with the weight 
Of that old Man's forgiveness on thy heart, 
Pressing as heavily as it doth on mine. 
Coward I have been ; know, there lies not now 
Within the compass of a mortal thought, 
A deed that I would shrink from ; — but to endure, 
That is my destiny. May it be thine : 
Thy office, thy ambition, be henceforth 
To feed remorse, to welcome every sting 
Of penitential anguish, yea with tears. 
When seas and continents shall lie between us — ■ 
The wider space the better — we may find 
In such a course fit links of sympathy, 
An incommunicable rivalship 
Maintained, for peaceful ends beyond our view. 
[Confused voices — several of the band enter — rush 
upon Oswald and seize him. 
One of them. I would have dogged him to the 
jaws of hell — 
Osw. Ha ! is it so ! — That vagrant Hag ! — this 
comes 
Of having left a thing like her alive ! [Aside. 
Several voices. Despatch him ! 
Osw. If I pass beneath a rock 
And shout, and, with the echo of my voice, 
Bring down a heap of rubbish, and it crush me, 
I die without dishonour. Famished, starved, 
A Fool and Coward blended to my wish ! 
[Smiles scornfully and exultingly at Marmaduke. 
Wal. 'Tis done ! (stabs him.) 
Another of the band. The ruthless Traitor ! 
Mar. A rash deed ! — 
With that reproof I do resign a station 
Of which I have been proud. 
Wil. (approaching Marmaduke). my poor 
Master ! 
Mar. Discerning Monitor, my faithful Wilfred, 
Why art thou here % [Turning to Wallace. 
Wallace, upon these Borders, 
Many there be whose eyes will not want cause 
To weep that I am gone. Brothers in arms ! 
Raise on that dreary Waste a monument 

THE BORDERERS. 

 

That may record my story : nor let words — 
Few must they be, and delicate in their touch 
As light itself — be there withheld from Her 
Who, through most wicked arts, was made an 
orphan 
By One who would have died a thousand times, 
To shield her from a moment's harm. To you, 
Wallace and Wilfred, I commend the Lady, 
By lowly nature reared, as if to make her 
In all things worthier of that noble birth, 
Whose long-suspended rights are now on the eve 
Of restoration : with your tenderest care 
Watch over her, I pray — sustain her 
Several of the band (eagerly). Captain ! 
Mar. No more of that ; in silence hear my doom : 

A hermitage has furnished fit relief 
To some offenders ; other penitents, 
Less patient in their wretchedness, have fallen, 
Like the old Roman, on their own sword's point. 
They had their choice : a wanderer must I go, 
The Spectre of that innocent Man, my guide. 
No human ear shall ever hear me speak ; 
No human dwelling ever give me food, 
Or sleep, or rest : but, over waste and wild, 
In search of nothing, that this earth can give, 
But expiation, will I wander on — 
A Man by pain and thought compelled to live, 
Yet loathing life— till anger is appeased 
In Heaven, and Mercy gives me leave to die. 
-. 


 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

POEMS REFERRING TO THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

My heart leaps up when I behold 
A rainbow in the sky : 
So was it when my life began ; 
So is it now I ani a man ; 
So be it when I shall grow old, 
Or let me die ! 
The Child is father of the Man ; 
And I could wish my days to be 
Bound each to each by natural piety. 

TO A BUTTERFLY. 
Stay near me — do not take thy flight ! 
A little longer stay in sight ! 
Much converse do I find in thee, 
Historian of my infancy ! 
Float near me ; do not yet depart ! 
Dead times revive in thee : 
Thou bring'st, gay creature as thou art ! 
A solemn image to my heart, 
My father's family ! 
Oh ! pleasant, pleasant were the days, 
The time, when, in our childish plays, 
My sister Emmeline and I 
Together chased the butterfly ! 
A very hunter did I rush 
Upon the prey : — with leaps and springs 
I followed on from brake to bush ; 
But she, God love her ! feared to brush 
The dust from off its wings. 

THE SPARROW'S NEST. 
Behold, within the leafy shade, 
Those bright blue eggs together laid ! 
On me the chance-discovered sight 
Gleamed like a vision of delight. 
I started — seeming to espy 
The home and sheltered bed, 

The Sparrow's dwelling, which, hard by 
My Father's house, in wet or dry 
My sister Emmeline and I 
Together visited. 
She looked at it and seemed to fear it ; 
Dreading, tho' wishing, to be near it • 
Such heart was in hex', being then 
A little Prattler among men. 
The Blessing of my later years 
Was with me when a boy : 
She gave me eyes, she gave me ears ; 
And humble cares, and delicate fears ; 
A heart, the fountain of sweet tears ; 
And love, and thought, and joy. 

FORESIGHT. 

That is work of waste and ruin — 
Do as Charles and I are doing ! 
Strawberry-blossoms, one and all, 
We must spare them — here are many : 
Look at it — the flower is small, 
Small and low, though fair as any : 
Do not touch it ! summers two 
I am older, Anne, than you. 
Pull the primrose, sister Anne ! 
Pull as many as you can. 
— Here are daisies, take your fill ; 
Pansies, and the cuckoo-flower : 
Of the lofty daffodil 
Make your bed, or make your bower ; 
Fill your lap, and fill your bosom ; 
Only spare the strawberry-blossom ! 
Primroses, the Spring may love them — 
Summer knows but little of them : 
Violets, a barren kind, 
Withered on the ground must he ; 
Daisies leave no fruit behind 
When the pretty flowerets die ; 
Pluck them, and another year 
As many will be blowing here. 

THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

God has given a kindlier power 
To the favoured strawberry-flower. 
Hither soon as spring is fled 
You and Charles and I will walk ; 
Lurking berries, ripe and red, 
Then M'ill hang on every stalk, 
Each within its leafy bower ; 
And for that promise spare the flower ! 

CHARACTERISTICS OF A CHILD THREE 
YEARS OLD. 
Loving she is, and tractable, though wild ; 
And Innocence hath privilege in her 
To dignify arch looks and laughing eyes ; 
And feats of cunning ; and the pretty round 
Of trespasses, affected to provoke 
Mock- chastisement and partnership in play. 
And, as a faggot sparkles on the hearth, 
Not less if unattended and alone 
Than when both young and old sit gathered round 
And take delight in its activity ; 
Even so this happy Creature of herself 
Is all-sufficient ; solitude to her 
Is blithe society, who fills the air 
With gladness and involuntary songs. 
Light are her sallies as the tripping fawn's 
Forth-startled from the fern where she lay couched ; 
Unthought-of, unexpected, as the stir 
Of the soft breeze ruffling the meadow-flowers, 
Or from before it chasing wantonly 
The many-coloured images imprest 
Upon the bosom of a placid lake. 

ADDRESS TO A CHILD, 
DURING A BOISTEROUS WINTER EVENING. 
BY MY SISTER. 
What way does the Wind come ? What way does 
he go ? 
He rides over the water, and over the snow, 
Through wood, and through vale ; and, o'er rocky 
height 
Which the goat cannot climb, takes his sounding 
flight ; 
He tosses about in every bare tree, 
As, if you look up, you plainly may see ; 

But how he will come, and whither he goes, 
There 's never a scholar in England knows. 
He will suddenly stop in a cunning nook, 
And ring a sharp 'larum ; — but, if you should look, 
There 's nothing to see but a cushion of snow 
Round as a pillow, and whiter than milk, 
And softer than if it were covered with silk. 
Sometimes he ' hide in the cave of a rock, 
Then whistle as shrill as the buzzard cock ; 
— Yet seek him,— and what shall you find in the 
place  
Nothing but silence and empty space ; 
Save, in a corner, a heap of dry leaves, 
That he's left, for a bed, to beggars or thieves ! 
As soon as 'tis daylight to-morrow, with me 
You shall go to the orchard, and then you will see 
That he has been there, and made a great rout, 
And cracked the branches, and strewn them about ; 
Heaven grant that he spare but that one upright 
twig 
That looked up at the sky so proud and big 
All last summer, as well you know, 
Studded with apples, a beautiful show ! 
Hark ! over the roof he makes a pause, 
And growls as if he would fix his claws 
Right in the slates, and with a huge rattle 
Drive them down, like men in a battle : 
— But let him range round ; he does us no harm. 
We build up the fire, we 're snug and warm ; 
Untouched by his breath see the candle shinesbright, 
And burns with a clear and steady light ; 
Books have we to read,— but that half-stifled knell, 
Alas ! 'tis the sound of the eight o'clock bell. 
— Come now we ' to bed ! and when we are there 
He may work his own will, and what shall we care ? 
He may knock at the door, — we ' not let him in ; 
May drive at the windows, — we ' laugh at his din ; 
Let him seek his own home wherever it be ; 
Here 's a cozie warm house for Edward and me. 
. 

THE MOTHER'S RETURN. 

BY THE SAME. 

A month, sweet Little-ones, is past 
Since your dear Mother went away,- 
And she to-morrow will return ; 
To-morrow is the happy day. 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

blessed tidings ! thought of joy ! 
The eldest heard with steady glee ; 
Silent he stood ; then laughed amain,— 
And shouted, " Mother, come to me !" 
Louder and louder did he shout, 
With witless hope to bring her near ; 
" Nay, patience ! patience, little boy ! 
Your tender mother cannot hear." 
 told of hills, and far-off towns, 
And long, long vales to travel through ; — 
He listens, puzzled, sore perplexed, 
But he submits ; what can he do ? 
No strife disturbs his sister's breast ; 
She wars not with the mystery 
Of time and distance, night and day ; 
The bonds of our humanity. 
Her joy is like an instinct, joy 
Of kitten, bird, or summer fly ; 
She dances, runs without an aim, 
She chatters in her ecstasy. 
Her brother now takes up the note, 
And echoes back his sister's glee ; 
They hug the infant in my arms, 
As if to force his sympathy. 
Then, settling into fond discourse, 
We rested in the garden bower ; 
While sweetly shone the evening sun 
In his departing hour. 
We told o'er all that we had done, — 
Our rambles by the swift brook's side 
Far as the willow-skirted pool, 
Where two fair swans together glide. 
We talked of change, of winter gone, 
Of green leaves on the hawthorn spray, 
Of birds that build their nests and sing 
And all " since Mother went away ! " 
To her these tales they will repeat, 
To her our new-born tribes will show, 
The goslings green, the ass's colt, 
The lambs that in the meadow go. 
. — But, see, the evening star comes forth ! 
To bed the children must depart ; 
A moment's heaviness they feel, 
A sadness at the heart : 

'Tis gone — and in a merry fit 
They run up stairs in gamesome race ; 
I, too, infected by their mood, 
I could have joined the wanton chase. 
Five minutes past — and, the change ! 
Asleep upon their beds they lie ; 
Their busy limbs in perfect rest, 
And closed the sparkling eye. 

. 

VIII. 
ALICE FELL; 
OR, FOVERTY. 

The post-boy drove with fierce career, 
For threatening clouds the moon had drowned ; 
When, as we hurried on, my ear 
Was smitten with a startling sound. 
As if the wind blew many ways, 
I heard the sound, — and more and more ; 
It seemed to follow with the chaise, 
And still I heard it as before. 
At length I to the boy called out ; 
He stopped his horses at the word, 
But neither cry, nor voice, nor shout, 
Nor aught else like it, could be heard. 
The boy then smacked his whip, and fast 
The horses scampered through the rain ; 
But, hearing soon upon the blast 
The cry, I bade him halt again. . 
Forthwith alighting on the ground, 
" Whence comes," said I, " this piteous moan ? " 
And there a little Girl I found, 
Sitting behind the chaise, alone. 
" My cloak !" no other word she spake, 
But loud and bitterly she wept, 
As if her innocent heart would break ; 
And down from off her seat she leapt. 
" What ails you, child ?" — she sobbed "Look here !' 
I saw it in the wheel entangled, 
A weather-beaten rag as e'er 
From any garden scare-crow dangled. 
There, twisted between nave and spoke, 
It hung, nor could at once be freed ; 
But our joint pains unloosed the cloak, 
A miserable rag indeed ! 

THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

« And whither are you going, child, 
To-night along these lonesome ways V 
" To Durham," answered she, half wild — 
" Then come with me into the chaise." 
Insensible to all relief 
Sat the poor girl, and forth did send 
Sob after sob, as if her grief 
Could never, never have an end. 
" My child, in Durham do you dwell " 
She checked herself in her distress, 
And said, " My name is Alice Fell ; 
I'm fatherless and motherless. 
And I to Durham, Sir, belong." 
Again, as if the thought would choke 
Her very heart, her grief grew strong ; 
And all was for her tattered cloak ! 
The chaise drove on ; our journey's end 
Was nigh ; and, sitting by my side, 
As if she had lost her only friend 
She wept, nor would be pacified. 
Up to the tavern-door we post ; 
Of Alice and her grief I told ; 
And I gave money to the host, 
To buy a new cloak for the old. 
« And let it be of duffil grey, 
As warm a cloak as man can sell !" 
Proud creature was she the next day, 
The little orphan, Alice Fell ! 

IX. 
LUCY GRAY; 
OB, SOLITUDE. 

Oft I had heard of Lucy Gray : 
And, when I crossed the wild, 
I chanced to see at break of day 
The solitary child. 
No mate, no comrade Lucy knew ; 
She dwelt on a wide moor, 
— The sweetest thing that ever grew 
Beside a human door ! 

You yet may spy the fawn at play, 
The hare upon the green ; 
But the sweet face of Lucy Gray 
Will never more be seen. 
" To-night will be a stormy night — 
You to the town must go ; 
And take a lantern, Child, to light 
Your mother through the snow." 
" That, Father ! will I gladly do : 
'Tis scarcely afternoon — 
The minster-clock has just struck two, 
And yonder is the moon '" 
At this the Father raised his hook, 
And snapped a faggot-band ; 
He plied his work ; — and Lucy took 
The lantern in her hand. 
Not blither is the mountain roe : 
With many a wanton stroke 
Her feet disperse the powdery snow, 
That rises up like smoke. 
The storm came on before its time : 
She wandered up and down ; 
And many a hill did Lucy climb : 
But never reached the town. 
The wretched parents all that night 
Went shouting far and wide ; 
But there was neither sound nor sight 
To serve them for a guide. 
At day-break on a hill they stood 
That overlooked the moor ; 
And thence they saw the bridge of wood, 
A furlong from their door. 
They wept — and, turning homeward, cried, 
" In heaven we all shall meet ;" 
— When in the snow the mother spied 
The print of Lucy's feet. 
Then downwards from the steep hill's edge 
They tracked the footmarks small ; 
And through the broken hawthorn hedge, 
And by the long stone-wall ; 
And then an open field they crossed : 
The marks were still the same ; 
They tracked them on, nor ever lost ; 
And to the bridge they came. 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

They followed from the snowy bank 
Those footmarks, one by one, 
Into the middle of the plank ; 
And further there were none ! 
— Yet some maintain that to this day 
She is a living child ; 
That you may see sweet Lucy Gray 
Upon the lonesome wild. 

O'er rough and smooth she trips 
And never looks behind ; 
And sings a solitary song 
That whistles in the wind. 

. 

WE ARE SEVEN. 
A simple Child, 

That lightly draws its breath, 
And feels its life in every limb, 
What should it know of death ? 
I met a little cottage Girl : 
She was eight years old, she said ; 
Her hair was thick with many a curl 
That clustered round her head. 
She had a rustic, woodland air, 
And she was wildly clad : 
Her eyes were fair, and very fair ; 
— Her beauty made me glad. 
" Sisters and brothers, little Maid, 
How many may you be " 
" How many ? Seven hi all," she said, 
And wondering looked at me. 
" And where are they ? I pray you tell." 
She answered, " Seven are we ; 
And two of us at Conway dwell, 
And two are gone to sea. 
Two of us in the church-yard lie, 
My sister and my brother ; 
And, in the church-yard cottage, I 
Dwell near them with my mother." 
u You say that two at Conway dwell, 
And two are gone to sea, 
Yet ye are seven ! — I pray you tell, 
Sweet Maid, how this may be." 

Then did the little Maid reply, 
" Seven boys and girls are we ; 
Two of us in the church-yard lie, 
Beneath the church-yard tree." 
" You run about, my little Maid, 
Your limbs they are alive ; 
If two are in the church-yard laid, 
Then ye are only five." 
" Their graves are green, they may be seen," 
The little Maid replied, 
" Twelve steps or more from my mother's door. 
And they are side by side. 
My stockings there I often knit, 
My kerchief there I hem ; 
And there upon the ground I sit, 
And sing a song to them. 
And often after sun-set, Sir, 
When it is light and fair, 
I take my little porringer, 
And eat my supper there. 
The first that died was sister Jane ; 
In bed she moaning lay, 
Till God released her of her pain ; 
And then she went away. 
So in the church-yard she was laid ; 
And, when the grass was dry, 
Together round her grave we played, 
My brother John and I. 
And when the ground was white with snow, 
And I could run and slide, 
My brother John was forced to go, 
And he lies by her side." 
" How many are you, then," said I, 
" If they two are in heaven I" 
Quick was the little Maid's reply, 
" Master ! we are seven." 
a But they are dead ; those two are dead ! 
Their spirits are in heaven !" 
'Twas throwing words away ; for still 
The little Maid would have her will, 
And said, " Nay, we are seven !" 
. 

H 

THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

THE IDLE SHEPHERD-BOYS; 
OR, DUNGEON-GHYLL FORCE. 

A PASTORAL. 

The valley rings with mirth and joy ; 
Among the hills the echoes play 
A never never ending song, 
To welcome in the May. 
The magpie chatters with delight ; 
The mountain raven's youngling hrood 
Have left the mother and the nest ; 
And they go rambling east and west 
In search of their own food ; 
Or through the glittering vapours dart 
In very wantonness of heart. 
Beneath a rock, upon the grass, 
Two hoys are sitting in the sun ; 
Their work, if any work they have, 
Is out of mind — or done. 
On pipes of sycamore they play 
The fragments of a Christmas hymn ; 
Or with that plant which in our dale 
We call stag-horn, or fox's tail, 
Their rusty hats they trim : 
And thus, as happy as the day, 
Those Shepherds wear the time away. 
Along the river's stony marge 
The sand-lark chants a joyous song ; 
The thrush is busy in the wood, 
And carols loud and strong. 
A thousand lambs are on the -rocks, 
All newly born ! both earth and sky 
Keep jubilee, and more than all, 
Those boys with their green coronal ; 
They never hear the cry, 
That plaintive cry ! which up the hill 
Comes from the depth of Dungeon-Ghyll. 
Said Walter, leaping from the ground, 
I Down to the stump of yon old yew 
We ' for our whistles run a race." 
Away the shepherds flew ; 
They leapt — they ran — and when they came 
Right opposite to Dungeon-Ghyll, 

 Ghyll, in the dialect of Cumberland and Westmore- 
land, is a short and, for the most part, a steep narrow 
valley, with a stream running through it. Force is the 
word universally employed in these dialects for waterfall. 

Seeing that he should lose the prize, 
" Stop ! " to his comrade Walter cries — 
James stopped with no good will : 
Said Walter then, exulting ; " Here 
You ' find a task for half a year. 
Cross, if you dare, where I shall cross — 
Come on, and tread where I shall tread." 
The other took him at his word, 
And followed as he led. 
It was a spot which you may see 
If ever you to Langdale go ; 
Into a chasm a mighty block 
Hath fallen, and made a bridge of rock : 
The gulf is deep below ; 
And, in a basin black and small, 
Receives a lofty waterfall. 
With staff in hand across the cleft 
The challenger pursued his march ; 
And now, all eyes and feet, hath gained 
The middle of the arch. 
When list ! he hears a piteous moan — 
Again ! — his heart within him dies — 
His pulse is stopped, his breath is lost, 
He totters, pallid as a ghost, 
And, looking down, espies 
A lamb, that in the pool is pent 
Within that black and frightful rent. 
The lamb had slipped into the stream, 
And safe without a bruise or wound 
The cataract had borne him down 
Into the gulf profound. 
His dam had seen him when he fell, 
She saw him down the torrent borne ; 
And, while with all a mother's love 
She from the lofty rocks above 
Sent forth a cry forlorn, 
The lamb, still swimming round and round, 
Made answer to that plaintive sound. 
When he had learnt what thing it was, 
That sent this rueful cry ; I ween 
The Boy recovered heart, and told 
The sight which he had seen. 
Both gladly now deferred their task ; 
Nor was there wanting other aid — 
A Poet, one who loves the brooks 
Far better than the sages' books, 
By chance had thither strayed ; 
And there the helpless lamb he found 
By those huge rocks encompassed round. 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

He drew it from the troubled pool. 
And brought it forth into the light : 
The Shepherds met him with his charge, 
An unexpected sight ! 
Into their arms the lamb they took, 
Whose life and limbs the flood had spared ; 
Then up the steep ascent they hied, 
And placed him at his mother's side ; 
And gently did the Bard 
Those idle Shepherd-boys upbraid, 
And bade them better mind their trade. 
. 

ANECDOTE FOR FATHERS, 
' Eetine vim istam, falsa enim dicam, si coges.' 
Eusbbius. 
I have a boy of five years old ; 
His face is fair and fresh to see ; 
His limbs are cast in beauty's mould, 
And dearly he loves me. 
One morn we strolled on our dry walk, 
Our quiet home all full in view, 
And held such intermitted talk 
As we are wont to do. 
My thoughts on former pleasures ran ; 
I thought of Kilve's delightful shore, 
Our pleasant home when spring began, 
A long, long year before. 
A day it was when I could bear 
Some fond regrets to entertain ; 
With so much happiness to spare, 
I could not feel a pain. 
The green earth echoed to the feet 
Of lambs that bounded through the glade, 
From shade to sunshine, and as fleet 
From sunshine back to shade. 
Birds warbled round me — and each trace 
Of inward sadness had its charm ; 
Kilve, thought I, was a favoured place, 
And so is Liswyn farm. 
My boy beside me tripped, so slim 
And graceful in his rustic dress ! 
And, as we talked, I questioned him, 
In very idleness. 

" Now tell me, had you rather be," 
I said, and took him by the arm, 
" On Kilve's smooth shore, by the green sea, 
Or here at Liswyn farm ? " 
In careless mood he looked at me, 
While still I held him by the arm, 
And said, " At Kilve I 'd rather be 
Than here at Liswyn farm." 
" Now, little Edward, say why so : 
My little Edward, tell me why." — 
" I cannot tell, I do not know." — 
" Why, this is strange," said I ; 
" For, here are woods, hills smooth and warm ; 
There surely must some reason be 
Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm 
For Kilve by the green sea." 
At this, my boy hung down his head, 
He blushed with shame, nor made reply ; 
And three times to the child I said, 
" Why, Edward, tell me why ? " 
His head he raised — there was in sight, 
It caught Ms eye, he saw it plain — 
Upon the house-top, glittering bright, 
A broad and gilded vane. 
Then did the boy his tongue unlock, 
And eased his mind with this reply : 
" At Kilve there was no weather-cock ; 
And that 's the reason why." 
dearest, dearest boy ! my heart 
For better lore would seldom yearn, 
Could I but teach the hundredth part 
Of what from thee I learn. 
. 

XIII. 
RURAL ARCHITECTURE. 
There's George Fisher, Charles Fleming, and 
Reginald Shore, 
Three rosy-cheeked school-boys, the highest not 
more 
Than the height of a counsellor's bag j 
To the top of Great How did it please them to 
climb : 

 Great How is a single and conspicuous hill, which 
rises towards the foot of Thirlmere, on the western side of 


THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

And there they built up, without mortar or lime, 
! A Man on the peak of the crag. 
They built him of stones gathered up as they lay : 
They built him and christened him all in one day, 
An urchin both vigorous and hale ; 
And so without scruple they called him Ralph Jones. 
Now Ralph is renowned for the length of his bones; 
The Magog of Legberthwaite dale. 
Just half a week after, the wind sallied forth, 
And, in anger or merriment, out of the north, 
Coming on with a terrible pother, 
From the peak of the crag blew the giant away. 
And what did these school-boys  — The very next 
day 
They went and they built up another. 
—Some little I 've seen of blind boisterous works 
By Christian disturbers more savage than Turks, 
Spirits busy to do and undo : 
At remembrance whereof my blood sometimes will 
flag; 
Then, light-hearted Boys, to the top of the crag ; 
And I ' build up a giant with you. 

XIV. 
THE PET-LAMB. 

A PASTOItAL. 
The dew was falling fast, the stars began to blink ; 
I heard a voice ; it said, " Drink, pretty creature, 
drink!" 
And, looking o'er the hedge, before me I espied 
A snow-white mountain-lamb with a Maiden at its 
side. 
Nor sheep nor kine were near ; the lamb was all 
alone, 
And by a slender cord was tethered to a stone ; 
With one knee on the grass did the little Maiden 
kneel, 
While to that mountain-lamb she gave its evening 
meal. 
The lamb, while from her hand he thus his supper 
took, 
Seemed to feast with head and ears ; and his tail 
with pleasure shook. 

the beautiful dale of Legberthwaite, along the high road 
between Keswick and Ambleside. 

" Drink, pretty creature, drink," she said in such 
a tone 
That I almost received her heart into my own. 
'Twas little Barbara Lewthwaite, a child of beauty 
rare ! 
I watched them with delight, they were a lovely pair. 
Now with her empty can the maiden turned away : 
But ere ten yards were gone her footsteps did she 
stay. 
Right towards the lamb she looked ; and from a 
shady place 
I unobserved could see the workings of her face : 
If Nature to her tongue could measured numbers 
bring, 
Thus, thought I, to her lamb that little Maid might 
sing: 
" What ails thee, young One ? what  Why pull 
so at thy cord ? 
Is itnot well with thee ? well both for bed and board? 
Thy plot of grass is soft, and green as grass can be ; 
Rest, little young One, rest ; what is 't that aileth 
thee ? 
What is it thou wouldst seek ? What is wanting 
to thy heart  
Thy limbs are they not strong ? And beautiful 
thou art : 
This grass is tender grass ; these flowers they have 
no peers ; 
And that green com all day is rustling in thy ears ! 
If the sun be shining hot, do but stretch thy woollen 
chain, 
This beech is standing by, its covert thou canst gain ; 
For rain and mountain-storms ! the like thou 
need'st not fear, 
The rain and storm are things that scarcely can 
come here. 
Rest, little young One, rest ; thou hast forgot the day 
When my father found thee first in places far away ; 
Many flocks were on the hills, but thou wert owned 
by none, 
And thy mother from thy side for evermore was 
gone. 
He took thee in his arms, and in pity brought thee 
home : 
A blessed day for thee ! then whither wouldst 
thou roam ? 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

A faithful nurse thou hast ; the dam that did thee 
yean 
Upon the mountain tops no kinder could have been. 
Thou know'st that twice a day I have brought thee 
in this can 
Fresh water from the brook, as clear as ever ran ; 
And twice in the day, when the ground is wet with 
dew, 
I bring thee draughts of milk, warm milk it is and 
new. 
Thy limbs will shortly be twice as stout as they 
are now, 
Then I ' yoke thee to my cart like a pony in the 
plough ; 
My playmate thou shalt be ; and when the wind is 
cold 
Our hearth shall be thy bed, our house shall be 
thy fold. 
It will not, will not rest ! — Poor creature, can it be 
That 'tis thy mother's heart which is working so 
in thee ? 
Things that I know not of belike to thee are dear, 
And dreams of things which thou canst neither see 
nor hear. 
Alas, the mountain- tops that look so green and fair ! 
I 've heard of feai-ful winds and darkness that come 
there ; 
The little brooks that seem all pastime and all play, 
When they are angry, roar like lions for their prey. 
Here thou need'st not dread the raven in the sky ; 
Night and day thou art safe, — our cottage is hard by. 
Why bleat so after me ? Why pull so at thy chain  
Sleep — and at break of day I will come to thee 
again !" 
— As homeward through the lane I went with lazy 
feet, 
This song to myself did I oftentimes repeat ; 
And it seemed, as I retraced the ballad line by line, 
That but half of it was hers, and one half of it was 

Again, and once again, did I repeat the song ; 
" Nay," said I, " more than half to the damsel 
must belong, 
For she looked with such a look, and she spake 
with such a tone, 
That I almost received her heart into my own." 
. 

TO H. C. 

SfX YEARS OLD. 

O thou ! whose fancies from afar are brought : 
Who of thy words dost make a mock apparel, 
And fittest to unutterable thought 
The breeze-like motion and the self-born carol 
Thou faery voyager ! that dost float 
In such clear water, that thy boat 
May rather seem 
To brood on air than on an earthly stream; 
Suspended in a stream as clear as sky, 
Where earth and heaven do make one imagery ; 
blessed vision ! happy child ! 
Thou art so exquisitely wild, 
 think of thee with many fears 
For what may be thy lot hi future years. 
I thought of times when Pain might be thy guest, 
Lord of thy house and hospitality; 
And Grief, uneasy lover ! never rest 
But when she sate within the touch of thee. 
too industrious folly ! 
vain and causeless melancholy ! 
Nature will either end thee quite; 
Or, lengthening out thy season of delight, 
Preserve for thee, by individual right, 
A young lamb's heart among the full-grown flocks. 
What hast thou to do with sorrow, 
Or the injuries of to-morrow ? 
Thou art a dew-drop, which the morn brings forth, 
 fitted to sustain unkindly shocks, 
Or to be trailed along the soiling earth; 
A gem that glitters while it fives, 
And no forewarning gives; 
But, at the touch of wrong, without a strife 
Slips in a moment out of life. 



INFLUENCE OF NATURAL OBJECTS 
IN CALLING FORTH AND STRENGTHENING THE IMAGI- 
NATION IN BOYHOOD AND EARLY YOUTH. 
FROM AN UNPUBLISHED POKM. 
[This extract is reprinted from " The Friend."] 
Wisdom and Spirit of the universe ! 
Thou Soul, that art the Eternity of thought ! 
And giv'st to forms and images a breath 
And everlasting motion ! not in vain, 
By day or star-light, thus from my first dawn 

THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me 
The passions that build up our human soul; 
Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man; 
But with high objects, with enduring things, 
With life and nature ; purifying thus 
The elements of feeling and of thought, 
And sanctifying by such discipline 
Both pain and fear, — until we recognise 
A grandeur in the beatings of the heart. 
Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me 
With stinted kindness. In November days, 
When vapours rolling down the valleys made 
A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods 
At noon ; and mid the calm of summer nights, 
When, by the margin of the trembling lake, 
Beneath the gloomy hills, homeward I went 
In solitude, such intercourse was mine : 
Mine was it in the fields both day and night, 
And by the waters, all the summer long. 
And in the frosty season, when the sun 
Was set, and, visible for many a mile, 
The cottage-windows through the twilight blazed, 
I heeded not the summons: happy time 
It was indeed for all of us; for me 
It was a time of rapture ! Clear and loud 
The village-clock tolled six — I wheeled about, 
Proud and exulting like an untired horse 
That cares not for his home. — All shod with steel 
We hissed along the polished ice, in games 
Confederate, imitative of the chase 
And woodland pleasures, — the resounding horn, 
The pack loud-chiming, and the hunted hare. 
So through the darkness and the cold we flew, 
And not a voice was idle: with the din 
Smitten, the precipices rang aloud; 
The leafless trees and every icy crag 
Tinkled like iron; while far-distant hills 
Into the tumult sent an alien sound 
Of melancholy, not unnoticed while the stars, 
Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west 
The orange sky of evening died away. 
Not seldom from the uproar I retired 
Into a silent bay, or sportively 
Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng, 
To cut across the reflex of a star ; 
Image, that, flying still before me, gleamed 
Upon the glassy plain: and oftentimes, 
When we had given our bodies to the wind, 
And all the shadowy banks on either side 
Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still 
The rapid line of motion, then at once 
Have I, reclining back upon my heels, 

Stopped short ; yet still the solitary cliffs 
Wheeled by me — even as if the earth had rolled 
With visible motion her diurnal round ! 
Behind me did they stretch in solemn train, 
Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched 
Till all was tranquil as a summer sea. 
. 


XVII. 
THE LONGEST DAY. 
ADDRESSED TO MY DAUGHTER. 
Let us quit the leafy arbour, 
And the torrent murmuring by; 
For the sun is in his harbour, 
Weary of the open sky. 
Evening now unbinds the fetters 
Fashioned by the gloving light; 
All that breathe are thankful debtors 
To the harbinger of night. 
Yet by some grave thoughts attended 
Eve renews her calm career; 
For the day that now is ended, 
Is the longest of the year. 
Dora ! sport, as now thou sportest, 
On this platform, light and free; 
Take thy bliss, while longest, shortest, 
Are indifferent to thee ! 
Who would check the happy feeling 
That inspires the linnet's song ? 
Who would stop the swallow, wheeling 
On her pinions swift and strong ? 
Yet at this impressive season, 
Words which tenderness can speak 
From the truths of homely reason, 
Might exalt the loveliest cheek; 
And, while shades to shades succeeding 
Steal the landscape from the sight, 
I would urge this moral pleading, 
Last forer unn er of " Good night !" 
Summer ebbs; — each day that follows 
Is a reflux from on high, 
Tending to the darksome hollows 
Where the frosts of winter he. 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

He who governs the creaiiou, 
In his providence, assigned 
Such a gradual declination 
To the life of human kind. 
Yet we mark it not; — fruits redden, 
Fresh flowers blow, as flowers have blown, 
And the heart is loth to deaden 
Hopes that she so long hath known. 
Be thou wiser, youthful Maiden ! 
And when thy decline shall come, 
Let not flowers, or boughs fruit-laden, 
Hide the knowledge of thy doom. 
Now, even now, ere wrapped in slumber, 
Fix thine eyes upon the sea 
That absorbs time, space, and number ; 
Look thou to Eternity ! 
Follow thou the flowing river 
On whose breast are thither borne 
All deceived, and each deceiver, 
Through the gates of night and morn ; 
Through the year's successive portals ; 
Through the bounds which many a star 
Marks, not mindless of frail mortals, 
When his light returns from far. 
Thus when thou with Time hast travelled 
Toward the mighty gulf of things, 
And the mazy stream unravelled 
With thy best imaginings ; 
Think, if thou on beauty leanest, 
Think how pitiful that stay, 
Did not virtue give the meanest 
Charms superior to decay. 
Duty, like a strict preceptor, 
Sometimes frowns, or seems to frown ; 
Choose her thistle for thy sceptre, 
While youth's roses are thy crown. 
Grasp it, — if thou shrink and tremble, 
Fairest damsel of the green, 
Thou wilt lack the only symbol 
That proclaims a genuine queen ; 
And ensures those palms of honour 
Which selected spirits wear, 
Bending low before the Donor, 
Lord of heaven's unchanging year ! 

XVIII. 
THE NORMAN BOY. 
High on a broad unfertile tract of forest-skirted 
Down, 
Nor kept by Nature for herself, nor made by man 
his own, 
From home and company remote and every playful 
Served, tending a few sheep and goats, a ragged 
Norman Boy. 
Him never saw I, nor the spot; but from an English 
Dame, 
Stranger to me and yet my friend, a simple notice 
came, 
With suit that I would speak in vei'se of that seques- 
tered child 
Whom, one bleak winter's day, she met upon the 
dreary Wild. 
His flock, along the woodland's edge with relics 
sprinkled o'er 
Of last night's snow, beneath a sky threatening the 
fall of more, 
Where tufts of herbage tempted each, were busy at 
their feed, 
And the poor Boy was busier still, with work of 
anxious heed. 
There was he, where of branches rent and withered 
and decayed, 
For covert from the keen north wind, his hands a 
hut had made. 
A tiny tenement, forsooth, and frail, as needs must be 
A thing of such materials framed, by a builder 
such as he. 
The hut stood finished by his pains, nor seemingly 
lacked aught 
That skill or means of his could add, but the 
architect had wrought 
Some limber twigs into a Cross, well-shaped with 
fingers nice, 
To be engrafted on the top of his small edifice. 
That Cross he now was fastening there, as the surest 
power and best 
For supplying all deficiencies, all wants of the rude 
nest 
In which, from burning heat, or tempest driving 
far and wide, 
The innocent Boy, else shelterless, his lonely head 
must hide. 

THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

 

That Cross belike he also raised as a standard for 
the true 
And faithful service of his heart in the worst that 
might ensue 
Of hardship and distressful fear, amid the houseless 
waste 
Where he, in his poor self so weak, by Providence 
was placed. 
Here, Lady ! might I cease ; but nay, let us 
before we part 
With this dear holy shepherd-boy breathe a prayer 
of earnest heart, 
That unto him, where'er shall he his life's appointed 
way, 
The Cross, fixed in his soul, may prove an all- 
sufficing stay. 

XIX. 
THE POET'S DREAM, 
SEQUEL TO THE NORMAN HOY. 
Just as those final words were penned, the sun 
broke out in power, 
And gladdened all things ; but, as chanced^ within 
that very hour, 
Air blackened, thunder growled, fire flashed from 
clouds that hid the sky, 
And, for the Subject of my Verse, I heaved a 
pensive sigh. 
Nor could my heart by second thoughts from 
heaviness be cleared, 
For bodied forth before my eyes the cross-crowned 
hut appeared ; 
And, while around it storm as fierce seemed troub- 
ling earth and air, 
I saw, within, the Norman Boy kneeling alone in 
prayer. 
The Child, as if the thunder's voice spake with 
articulate call, 
Bowed meekly in submissive fear, before the Lord 
of All; 
His lips were moving ; and his eyes, upraised to 
sue for grace, 
With soft illumination cheered the dimness of that 
place. 
How beautiful is holiness ! — what wonder if the sight, 
Almost as vivid as a dream, produced a dream at 
night? 

It came with sleep and showed the Boy, no cherub, 
not transformed, 
But the poor ragged Thing whose ways my human 
heart had warmed. 
Me had the dream equipped with wings, so I took 
him in my arms, 
And lifted from the grassy floor, stilling his faint 
alarms, 
And bore him high through yielding air my debt 
of love to pay, 
By giving him, for both our sakes, an hour of 
holiday. 
I whispered, " Yet a little while, dear Child ! thou 
art my own, 
To show thee some delightful thing, in country or 
in town. 
What shall it be ? a mirthful throng ? or that holy 
place and calm 
St. Denis, filled with royal tombs, or the Church of 
Notre Dame ? 
" St. Ouen's golden Shrine ? Or choose what else 
would please thee most 
Of any wonder Normandy, or all proud France, 
can boast ! " 
" My Mother," said the Boy, " was born near to a 
blessed Tree, 
The Chapel Oak of Allonville ; good Angel, show 
it me !" 
On wings, from broad and stedfast poise let loose 
by this reply, 
For Allonville, o'er down and dale, away then did 
we fly; 
O'er town and tower we flew, and fields in May's 
fresh verdure drest ; 
The wings they did not flag; the Child, though 
grave, was not deprest. 
But who shall show, to waking sense, the gleam of 
light that broke 
Forth from his eyes, when first the Boy looked 
down on that huge oak, 
For length of days so much revered, so famous 
where it stands 
For twofold hallowing — Nature's care, and work 
of human hands ? 
Strong as an Eagle with my charge I glided round 
and round 
The wide-spread boughs, for view of door, window, 
and stair that wound 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 

Gracefully up the gnarled trunk ; nor left we 
unsurveyed 
The pointed steeple peering forth from the centre 
of the shade. 
I lighted — opened with soft touch the chapel's iron 
door, 
Past softly, leading in the Boy ; and, while from 
roof to floor 
From floor to roof all round his eyes the Child 
with wonder cast, 
Pleasure on pleasure crowded in, each livelier than 
the last. 
For, deftly framed within the trunk, the sanctuary 
showed, 
By light of lamp and preci ous stones, that glimmered 
here, there glowed, 
Shrine, Altar, Image, Offerings hung in sign of 
gratitude ; 
Sight that inspired accordant thoughts ; and speech 
I thus renewed : 
"Hither the Afflicted come, as thou hast heard 
thy Mother say, 
And, kneeling, supplication make to our Lady de 
la Paix ; 
What mournful sighs have here been heard, and, 
when the voice was stopt 
By sudden pangs ; what bitter tears have on this 
pavement dropt ! 
" Poor Shepherd of the naked Down, a favoured 
lot is thine, 
Far happier lot, dear Boy, than brings full many 
to this shrine ; 
From body pains and pains of soul thou needest no 
release, 
Thy hours as they flow on are spent, if not in joy, 
in peace. 
" Then offer up thy heart to God in thankfulness 
and praise, 
Give to Him prayers, and many thoughts, in thy 
most busy days ; 
And in His sight the fragile Cross, on thy small 
hut, will be 
Holy as that which long hath crowned the Chapel 
of this Tree ; 
" Holy as that far seen which crowns the sumptuous 
Church in Rome 
Where thousands meet to worship God under a 
mighty Dome ; 

He sees the bending multitude, he hears the choral 
rites, 
Yet not the less, in children's hymns and lonely 
prayer, delights. 
" God for his service needeth not proud work of 
human skill ; 
They please him best who labour most to do in 
peace his will : 
So let us strive to live, and to our Spirits will be 
given 
Such wings as, when our Saviour calls, shall bear 
us up to heaven." 
The Boy no answer made by words, but, so earnest 
was his look, 
Sleep fled, and with it fled the dream — recorded in 
this book, 
Lest all that passed should melt away in silence 
from my mind, 
As visions still more bright have done, and left no 
trace behind. 
But oh ! that Country-man of thine, whose eye, 
loved Child, can see 
A pledge of endless bliss in acts of early piety, 
In verse, which to thy ear might come, would treat 
this simple theme, 
Nor leave untold our happy flight in that 
adventurous dream. 
Alas the dream, to thee, poor Boy ! to thee from 
whom it flowed, 
Was nothing, scarcely can be aught, yet 'twas 
bounteously bestowed, 
If I may dare to cherish hope that gentle eyes will 
read 
Not loth, and listening Little-ones, heart-touched, 
their fancies feed. 

xx. 
THE WESTMORELAND GIRL. 
TO MV GRANDCHILDREN. 
PART I. 
Seek who will delight in fable 
I shall tell you truth. A Lamb 
Leapt from this steep bank to follow 
'Cross the brook its thoughtless dam. 
 See note. 

THE WESTMORELAND GIRL. 

 

Far and wide on hill and valley 
Rain had fallen, unceasing rain. 
And the bleating mother's Young-one 
Struggled with the flood in vain : 
But, as chanced, a Cottage-maiden 
(Ten years scarcely had she told) 
Seeing, plunged into the torrent, 
Clasped the Lamb and kept her hold. 
Whirled adown the rocky channel, 
Sinking, rising, on they go, 
Peace and rest, as seems, before them 
Only in the lake below. 
Oh ! it was a frightful current 
Whose fierce wrath the Girl had braved 
Clap your hands with joy my Hearers, 
Shout in triumph, both are saved ; 
Saved by courage that with danger 
Grew, by strength the gift of love, 
And belike a guardian angel 
Came with succour from above. 

PART II. 
Now, to a maturer Audience, 
Let me speak of this brave Child 
Left among her native mountains 
With wild Nature to run wild. 
So, unwatched by love maternal, 
Mother's care no more her guide, 
Fared this little bright-eyed Orphan 
Even while at her father's side. 
Spare your blame, — remembrance makes him 
Loth to rule by strict command ; 
Still upon his cheek are living 
Touches of her infant hand, 
Dear caresses given in pity, 
Sympathy that soothed his grief, 
As the dying mother witnessed 
To her thankful mind's relief. 
Time passed on ; the Child was happy, 
Like a Spirit of air she moved, 
Wayward, yet by all who knew her 
For her tender heart beloved. 
Scarcely less than sacred passions, 
Bred in house, in grove, and field, 
Link her with the inferior creatures, 
Urge her powers their rights to shield. 

Anglers, bent on reckless pastime, 
Learn how she can feel alike 
Both for tiny harmless minnow 
And the fierce and sharp-toothed pike. 
Merciful protectress, kindling 
Into anger or disdain ; 
Many a captive hath she rescued, 
Others saved from lingering pain. 
Listen yet awhile; — with patience 
Hear the homely truths I tell, 
She in Grasmere's old church-steeple 
Tolled this day the passing-bell. 
Yes, the wild Girl of the mountains 
To their echoes gave the sound, 
Notice punctual as the minute, 
Warning solemn and profound. 
She, fulfilling her sire's office, 
Rang alone the far-heard kuell, 
Tribute, by her hand, in sorrow, 
Paid to One who loved her well. 
When his spirit was departed 
On that service she went forth ; 
Nor will fail the like to render 
When his corse is laid in earth. 
What then wants the Child to temper, 
In her breast, unruly fire, 
To control the froward impulse 
And restrain the vague desire ? 
Easily a pious training 
And a stedfast outward power 
Would supplant the weeds and cherish, 
In their stead, each opening flower. 
Thus the fearless Lamb-deliv'rer, 
Woman-grown, meek-hearted, sage, 
May become a blest example 
For her sex, of every age. 
Watchful as a wheeling eagle, 
Constant as a soaring lark, 
Should the country need a heroine, 
She might prove our Maid of Arc. 
Leave that thought ; and here be uttered 
Prayer that Grace divine may raise 
Her humane courageous spirit 
Up to heaven, thro' peaceful ways. 
F 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

THE BROTHERS. 
" These Tourists, heaven preserve us ! needs must 
live 
A profitable life: some glance along, 
Rapid and gay, as if the earth were air, 
And they were butterflies to wheel about 
Long as the summer lasted : some, as wise, 
Perched on the forehead of a jutting crag, 
Pencil in hand and book upon the knee, 
Will look and scribble, scribble on and look, 
Until a man might travel twelve stout miles, 
Or reap an acre of his neighbour's corn. 
But, for that moping Son of Idleness, 
Why can he tarry yonder ? — In our church-yard 
Is neither epitaph nor monument, 
Tombstone nor name — only the turf we tread 
And a few natural graves." 
To Jane, his wife, 
Thus spake the homely Priest of Ennerdale. 
It was a July evening; and he sate 
Upon the long stone-seat beneath the eaves 
Of his old cottage, — as it chanced, that day, 
Employed in winter's work. Upon the stone 
His wife sate near him, teasing matted wool, 
While, from the twin cards toothed with glittering 
wire, 
He fed the spindle of his youngest child, 
Who, in the open air, with due accord 
Of busy hands and back-and-forward steps, 
Her large round wheel was turning. Towards the field 
In which the Parish Chapel stood alone, 
Girt round with a bare ring of mossy wall, 
While half an hour went by, the Priest had sent 
Many a long look of wonder : and at last, 
Risen from his seat, beside the snow-white ridge 
Of carded wool which the old man had piled 
He laid his implements with gentle care, 
Each in the other locked; and, down the path 
That from his cottage to the church-yard led, 
He took his way, impatient to accost 
The Stranger, whom he saw still lingering there. 
'Twas one well known to him in former days, 
A Shepherd-lad; who ere his sixteenth year 

Had left that calling, tempted to entrust 
His expectations to the fickle winds 
And perilous waters; with the mariners 
A fellow-mariner; — and so had fared 
Through twenty seasons; but he had been reared 
Among the mountains, and he in his heart 
Was half a shepherd on the stormy seas. 
Oft in the piping shrouds had Leonard heard 
The tones of waterfalls, and inland sounds 
Of caves and trees : — and, when the regular wind 
Between the tropics filled the steady sail, 
And blew with the same breath through days and 
weeks, 
Lengthening invisibly its weary line 
Along the cloudless Main, he, in those hours 
Of tiresome indolence, would often hang 
Over the vessel's side, and gaze and gaze ; 
And, while the broad blue wave and sparkling foam 
Flashed round him images and hues that wrought 
In union with the employment of his heart, 
He, thus by feverish passion overcome, 
Even with the organs of his bodily eye, 
Below him, in the bosom of the deep, 
Saw mountains; saw the forms of sheep that grazed 
On verdant hills — with dwellings among trees, 
And shepherds clad in the same country grey 
Which he himself had worn. 
And now, at last, 
From perils manifold, with some small wealth 
Acquired by traffic 'mid the Indian Isles, 
To his paternal home he is returned, 
With a determined purpose to resume 
The life he had lived there; both for the sake 
Of many darling pleasures, and the love 
Which to an only brother he has borne 
In all his hardships, since that happy time 
When, whether it blew foul or fair, they two 
Were brother-shepherds on their native hills. 
— They were the last of all their race: and now, 
When Leonard had approached his home, his heart 
Failed in him; and, not venturing to enquire 
Tidings of one so long and dearly loved, 

 This description of the Calenture is sketched from an 
imperfect recollection of an admirable one in prose, by Mr. 
Gilbert, author of the Hurricane. 

THE BROTHERS. 

 

He to the solitary church-yard turned; 
That, as he knew in what particular spot 
His family were laid, he thence might learn 
If still his Brother lived, or to the file 
Another grave was added. — He had found 
Another grave, — near which a full half-hour 
He had remained ; but, as he gazed, there grew 
Such a confusion in his memory, 
That he began to doubt; and even to hope 
That he had seen this heap of turf before, — 
That it was not another grave ; but one 
He had forgotten. He had lost his path, 
As up the vale, that afternoon, he walked 
Through fields which once had been well known to 
him : 
And oh what joy this recollection now 
Sent to his heart ! he lifted up his eyes, 
And, looking round, imagined that he saw 
Strange alteration wrought on every side 
Among the woods and fields, and that the rocks, 
And everlasting hills themselves were changed. 
By this the Priest, who down the field had come, 
Unseen by Leonard, at the church-yard gate 
Stopped short, — and thence, at leisure, limb by limb 
Perused him with a gay complacency. 
Ay, thought the Vicar, smiling to himself, 
'Tis one of those who needs must leave the path 
Of the world's business to go wild alone : 
His arms have a perpetual holiday ; 
The happy man will creep about the fields, 
Following his fancies by the hour, to bring 
Tears down his cheek, or solitary smiles 
Into his face, until the setting sun 
Write fool upon his forehead. — Planted thus 
Beneath a shed that over-arched the gate 
Of this rude church-yard, till the stars appeared 
The good Man might have communed with himself, 
But that the Stranger, who had left the grave, 
Approached ; he recognised the Priest at once, 
And, after greetings interchanged, and given 
By Leonard to the Vicar as to one 
Unknown to him, this dialogue ensued. 
Leonard. You five, Sir, in these dales, a quiet 
life: 
Your years make up one peaceful family ; 
And who would grieve and fret, if, welcome come 
And welcome gone, they are so like each other, 
They cannot be remembered ? Scarce a funeral 
Comes to this church-yard once in eighteen months; 
And yet, some changes must take place among you : 
And you, who dwell here, even among these rocks, 
Can trace the finger of mortality, 
And see, that with our threescore years and ten 

We are not all that perish.  remember, 
(For many years ago I passed this road) 
There was a foot-way all along the fields 
By the brook-side — 'tis gone — and that dark cleft ! 
To me it does not seem to wear the face 
Which then it had ! 
Priest. Nay, Sir, for aught I know, 
That chasm is much the same — 
Leonard.. But, surely, yonder — 
Priest. Ay, there, indeed, your memory is a friend 
That does not play you false. — On that tall pike 
(It is the loneliest place of all these hills) 
There were two springs which bubbled side by 
side, 
As if they had been made that they might be 
Companions for each other : the huge crag 
Was rent with lightning — one hath disappeared ; 
The other, left behind, is flowing still. 
For accidents and changes such as these, 
We want not store of them ; — a water-spout 
Will bring down half a mountain ; what a feast 
For folks that wander up and down like you, 
To see an acre's breadth of that wide cliff 
One roaring cataract ! a sharp May-storm 
Will come with loads of January snow, 
And in one night send twenty score of sheep 
To feed the ravens ; or a shepherd dies 
By some untoward death among the rocks : 
The ice breaks up and sweeps away a bridge ; 
A wood is felled : — and then for our own homes ! 
A child is born or christened, a field ploughed, 
A daughter sent to service, a web spun, 
The old house-clock is decked with a new face ; 
And hence, so far from wanting facts or dates 
To chronicle the time, we all have here 
A pair of diaries, — one serving, Sir, 
For the whole dale, and one for each fire-side — 
Yours was a stranger's judgment : for historians, 
Commend me to these valleys ! 
Leonard. Yet your Church-yard 
Seems, if such freedom may be used with you, 
To say that you are heedless of the past : 
An orphan could not find his mother's grave : 
Here 's neither head nor foot-stone, plate of brass, 
Cross-bones nor skull, — type of our earthly state 
Nor emblem of our hopes : the dead man's home 
Ts but a fellow to that pasture-field. 
Priest. Why, there, Sir, is a thought that 's new 
to me ! 
The stone-cutters, 'tis true, might beg their bread 
If every English church-yard were like ours ; 
Yet your conclusion wanders from the truth : 
We have no need of names and epitaphs ; 
We talk about the dead by our fire-sides. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

And then, for our immortal part ! we want 
No symbols, Sir, to tell us that plain tale : 
The thought of death sits easy on the man 
Who has been born and dies among the mountains. 
Leonard. Your Dalesmen, then, do in each other's 
thoughts 
Possess a kind of second life : no doubt 
You, Sir, could help me to the history 
Of half these graves  
Priest. For eight-score winters past, 
With what I 've witnessed, and with what I 've 
heard, 
Perhaps I might ; and, on a winter-evening, 
If you were seated at my chimney's nook, 
By turning o'er these hillocks one by one, 
We two could travel, Sir, through a strange round ; 
Yet all in the broad highway of the world. 
Now there 's a grave — your foot is half upon it, — 
It looks just like the rest ; and yet that man 
Died broken-hearted. 
Leonard. 'Tis a common case. 
We ' take another : who is he that lies 
Beneath yon ridge, the last of those three graves ? 
It touches on that piece of native rock 
Left in the church-yard wall. 
Priest. That 's Walter Ewbank. 
He had as white a head and fresh a cheek 
As ever were produced by youth and age 
Engendering in the blood of hale fourscore. 
Through five long generations had the heart 
Of Walter's forefathers o'erfiowed the bounds 
Of their inheritance, that single cottage — 
You see it yonder ! and those few green fields. 
They toiled and wrought, and still, from sire to 
son, 
Each struggled, and each yielded as before 
A little — yet a little, — and old Walter, 
They left to him the family heart, and land 
With other burthens than the crop it bore. 
Year after year the old man still kept up 
A cheerful mind, — and buffeted with bond, 
Interest, and mortgages ; at last he sank, 
And went into his grave before his time. 
Poor Walter ! whether it was care that spurred 
him 
God only knows, but to the very last 
He had the lightest foot in Ennerdale : 
His pace was never that of an old man : 
I almost see him tripping down the path 
With his two grandsons after him : — but you, 
Unless our Landlord be your host to-night, 
Have far to travel, — and on these rough paths 
Even in the longest day of midsummer — 
Leonard. But those two Orphans ! 

Priest. Orphans ! — Such they were- 
Yet not while Walter lived : — for, though their 
parents 
Lay buried side by side as now they lie, 
The old man was a father to the boys, 
Two fathers in one father : and if tears, 
Shed when he talked of them where they were not, 
And hauntings from the infirmity of love, 
Are aught of what makes up a mother's heart, 
This old Man, in the day of his old age, 
Was half a mother to them. — If you weep, Sir, 
To hear a stranger talking about strangers, 
Heaven bless you when you are among your 
kindred ! 
Ay — you may turn that way — it is a grave 
Which will bear looking at. 
Leonard. These boys — I hope 
They loved this good old Man  — 
Priest. They did — and truly : 
But that was what we almost overlooked, 
They were such darlings of each other. Yes, 
Though from the cradle they had lived with 
Walter, 
The only kinsman near them, and though he 
Inclined to both by reason of his age, 
With a more fond, familiar, tenderness ; 
They, notwithstanding, had much love to spare, 
And it all went into each other's hearts. 
Leonard, the elder by just eighteen months, 
Was two years taller : 'twas a joy to see, 
To hear, to meet them ! — From their house the 
school 
Is distant three short miles, and in the time 
Of storm and thaw, when every water-course 
And unbridged stream, such as you may have 
noticed 
Crossing our roads at every hundred steps, 
Was swoln into a noisy rivulet, 
Would Leonard then, when elder boys remained 
At home, go staggering through the slippery fords, 
Bearing his brother on his back. I have seen him, 
On windy days, in one of those stray brooks, 
Ay, more than once I have seen him, mid-leg deep, 
Their two books lying both on a dry stone, 
Upon the hither side : and once I said, 
As I remember, looking round these rocks 
And hills on which we all of us were bora, 
That God who made the great book of the world 
Would bless such piety — 
Leonard. It may be then — 
Priest. Never did worthier lads break English 
bread ; 
The very brightest Sunday Autumn saw 
With all its mealy clusters of ripe nuts, 

THE BROTHERS. 

 

Could never keep those boys away from church, 
Or tempt them to an hour of sabbath breach. 
Leonard and James ! I warrant, every comer 
Among these rocks, and every hollow place 
That venturous foot could reach, to one or both 
Was known as well as to the flowers that grow 
there. 
Like roe-bucks they went bounding o'er the hills ; 
They played like two young ravens on the crags : 
Then they could write, ay and speak too, as well 
As many of their betters — and for Leonard ! 
The very night before be went away, 
In my own house I put into his hand 
A bible, and I 'd wager house and field 
That, if he be alive, he has it yet. 
Leonard. It seems, these Brothers have not lived 
to be 
A comfort to each other — 
Priest. That they might 
Live to such end is what both old and young 
In this our valley all of us have wished, 
And what, for my part, I have often prayed : 
But Leonard — 
Leonard. Then James still is left among you ! 
Priest. 'Tis of the elder brother I am speaking : 
They had an uncle; — he was at that time 
A thriving man, and trafficked on the seas: 
And, but for that same uncle, to this hour 
Leonard had never handled rope or shroud: 
For the boy loved the life which we lead here; 
And though of unripe years, a stripling only, 
His soul was knit to this his native soil. 
But, as I said, old Walter was too weak 
To strive with such a torrent; when he died, 
The estate and house were sold; and all their sheep, 
A pretty flock, and which, for aught I know, 
Had clothed the Ewbanks for a thousand years : — 
Well — all was gone, and they were destitute, 
And Leonard, chiefly for his Brother's sake, 
Resolved to try his fortune on the seas. 
Twelve years are past since we had tidings from him. 
If there were one among us who had heard 
That Leonard Ewbank was come home again, 
From the Great Gavel , down by Leeza's banks, 
And down the Enna, far as Egremont, 
The day would be a joyous festival ; 

 The Great Gavel, so called, I imagine, from its resem- 
blance to the gable end of a house, is one of the highest of 
the Cumberland mountains. It stands at the head of the 
several vales of Ennerdale, Wastdale, and Borrowdale. 
The Leeza is a river which flows into the Lake of Enner- 
dale : on issuing from the Lake, it changes its name, and 
is called the End, Eyne, or Enna. It falls into the sea a 
little below Egremont. 

And those two bells of ours, which there you see — 
Hanging in the open air — but, good Sir ! 
This is sad talk — they ' never sound for him — 
Living or dead. — When last we heard of him, 
He was in slavery among the Moors 
Upon the Barbary coast. — 'Twas not a little 
That would bring down his spirit ; and no doubt, 
Before it ended in his death, the Youth 
Was sadly crossed. — Poor Leonard ! when we 
parted, 
He took me by the hand, and said to me, 
If e'er he should grow rich, he would return, 
To live in peace upon his father's land, 
And lay his bones among us. 
Leonard. If that day 
Should come, 't would needs be a glad day for him ; 
He would himself, no doubt, be happy then 
As any that should meet him — ■ 
Priest. Happy ! Sir — 
Leonard. You said his kindred all were in their 
graves, 
And that he had one Brother — 
Priest. That is but 
A fellow-tale of sorrow. From his youth 
James, though not sickly, yet was delicate ; 
And Leonard being always by his side 
Had done so many offices about him, 
That, though he was not of a timid nature, 
Yet still the spirit of a mountain-boy 
In him was somewhat checked; and, when his 
Brother 
Was gone to sea, and he was left alone, 
The little colour that he had was soon 
Stolen from his cheek ; he drooped, and pined, and 
pined — 
Leonard. But these are all the graves of full- 
grown men ! 
Priest. Ay, Sir, that passed away : we took him 
to us ; 
He was the cliild of all the dale — he lived 
Three months with one, and six months with another ; 
And wanted neither food, nor clothes, nor love : 
And many, many happy days were his. 
But, whether blithe or sad, 'tis my belief 
His absent Brother still was at his heart. 
And, when he dwelt beneath our roof, we found 
(A practice till this time unknown to him) 
That often, rising from his bed at night, 
He in his sleep would walk about, and sleeping 
He sought his brother Leonard. — You are moved! 
Forgive me, Sir : before I spoke to you, 
I judged you most unkindly. 
Leonard. But this Youth, 
How did he die at last ? 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Priest. One sweet May-morning, 
(It will be twelve years since when Spring returns) 
He had gone forth among the new-dropped lambs, 
With two or three companions, whom their course 
Of occupation led from height to height 
Under a cloudless sun — till he, at length, 
Through weariness, or, haply, to indulge 
The humour of the moment, lagged behind. 
You see yon precipice ; — it wears the shape 
Of a vast building made of many crags ; 
And in the midst is one particular rock 
That rises like a column from the vale, 
Whence by our shepherds it is called, The Pillar. 
Upon its aery summit crowned with heath, 
The loiterer, not unnoticed by his comrades, 
Lay stretched at ease ; but, passing by the place 
On their return, they found that he was gone. 
No ill was feared ; till one of them by chance 
Entering, when evening was far spent, the house 
Which at that time was James's home, there learned 
That nobody had seen him all that day : 
The morning came, and still he was unheard of : 
The neighbours were alarmed, and to the brook 
Some hastened ; some ran to the lake : ere noon 
They found him at the foot of that same rock 
Dead, and with mangled limbs. The third day after 
I buried him, poor Youth, and there he lies ! 
Leonard. And that then is his grave ! — Before 
his death 
You say that he saw many happy years ? 
Priest. Ay, that he did — 
Leonard. And all went well with him ? — 
Priest. If he had one, the youth had twenty homes. 
Leonard. And you believe, then, that his mind 
was easy ? — 
Priest. Yes, long before he died, he found that 
time 
Is a true friend to sorrow ; and unless 
His thoughts were turned on Leonard's luckless 
fortune, 
He talked about him with a cheerful love. 
Leonard. He could not come to an unhallowed 
end ! 
Priest. Nay, God forbid !— You recollect I 
mentioned 
A habit which disquietude and grief 
Had brought upon him ; and we all conjectured 
That, as the day was warm, he had lain down 
On the soft heath, — and, waiting for his comrades, 
He there had fallen asleep ; that in his sleep 
He to the margin of the precipice 
Had walked, and from the summit had fallen 
headlong : 
And so no doubt he perished. When the Youth 

Fell, in his hand he must have grasp'd, we think, 
His shepherd's staff ; for on that Pillar of rock 
It had been caught mid way ; and there for years 
It hung ; — and mouldered there. 
The Priest here ended — 
The Stranger would have thanked him, but he felt 
A gushing from his heart, that took away 
The power of speech. Both left the spot in silence ; 
And Leonard, when they reached the church-yard 
gate, 
As the Priest lifted up the latch, turned round, — 
And, looking at the grave, he said, " My Brother !" 
The Vicar did not hear the words : and now, 
He pointed towards his dwelling-place, entreating 
That Leonard would partake his homely fare : 
The other thanked him with an earnest voice ; 
But added, that, the evening being calm, 
He would pursue his journey. So they parted. 
It was not long ere Leonard reached a grove 
That overhung the road : he there stopped short, 
And, sitting down beneath the trees, reviewed 
All that the Priest had said : his early years 
Were with him : — his long absence, cherished hopes, 
And thoughts which had been his an hour before, 
All pressed on him with such a weight, that now, 
This vale, where he had been so happy, seemed 
A place in which he could not bear to live : 
So he relinquished all his purposes. 
He travelled back to Egremont : and thence, 
That night, he wrote a letter to the Priest, 
Reminding him of what had passed between them ; 
And adding, with a hope to be forgiven, 
That it was from the weakness of his heart 
He had not dared to tell him who he was. 
This done, he went on shipboard, and is now 
A Seaman, a grey-headed Mariner. 
. 

ARTEGAL AND ELIDURE. 
(see the chronicle of geoffrey of monmouth and 
milton's history of England ) 
Where be the temples which, in Britain's Isle, 
For his paternal Gods, the Trojan raised ? 
Gone like a morning dream, or like a pile 
Of clouds that in cerulean ether blazed ! 
Ere Julius landed on her white-cliffed shore, 
They sank, delivered o'er 
To fatal dissolution ; and, I ween, 
No vestige then was left that such had ever been. 

ARTEGAL AND ELIDURE. 

Nathless, a British record (long concealed 
In old Armorica, whose secret springs 
No Gothic conqueror ever drank) revealed 
The marvellous current of forgotten things ; 
How Brutus came, by oracles impelled, 
And Albion's giants quelled, 
A brood whom no civility could melt, 
' Who never tasted grace, and goodness ne'er had 
felt.' 
By brave Corineus aided, he subdued, 
And rooted out the intolerable kind ; 
And this too-long-polluted land imbued 
With goodly arts and usages refined ; 
Whence golden harvests, cities, warlike towers, 
And pleasure's sumptuous bowers ; 
Whence all the fixed delights of house and home, 
Friendships that will not break, and love that can- 
not roam. 
O, happy Britain ! region all too fair 
For self-delighting fancy to endure 
That silence only should inhabit there, 
Wild beasts, or uncouth savages impure ! 
But, intermingled with the generous seed, 
Grew many a poisonous weed ; 
Thus fares it still with all that takes its birth 
From human care, or grows upon the breast of earth. 
Hence, and how soon ! that war of vengeance waged 
By Guendolen against her faithless lord ; 
Till she, in jealous fury unassuaged 
Had slain his paramour with ruthless sword : 
Then, into Severn hideously defiled, 
She flung her blameless child, 
Sabrina, — vowing that the stream should bear 
That name through every age, her hatred to declare. 
So speaks the Chronicle, and tells of Lear 
By his ungrateful daughters turned adrift. 
Ye lightnings, hear his voice !— they cannot hear, 
Nor can the winds restore his simple gift. 
But One there is, a Child of nature meek, 
Who comes her Sire to seek ; 
And he, recovering sense, upon her breast 
Leans smilingly, and sinks into a perfect rest. 
There too we read of Spenser's fairy themes, 
And those that Milton loved in youthful years ; 
The sage enchanter Merlin's subtle schemes ; 
The feats of Arthur and his knightly peers ; 
Of Arthur, — who, to upper light restored, 
With that terrific sword 
Which yet he brandishes for future war, 
Shall lift his country's fame above the polar star ! 

What wonder, then, if in such ample field 
Of old tradition, one particular flower 
Doth seemingly in vain its fragrance yield, 
And bloom unnoticed even to this late hour ? 
Now, gentle Muses, your assistance grant, 
While I this flower transplant 
Into a garden stored with Poesy ; 
Where flowers and herbs unite, and haply some 
weeds be, 
That, wanting not wild grace, are from all mischief 
free ! 
A King more worthy of respect and love 
Than wise Gorbonian ruled not in his day ; 
And grateful Britain prospered far above 
All neighbouring countries through his righteous 
sway; 
He poured rewards and honours on the good ; 
The oppressor he withstood ; 
And while he served the Gods with reverence clue 
Fields smiled, and temples rose, and towns and 
cities grew. 
He died, whom Artegal succeeds — his son ; 
But how unworthy of that sire was he ! 
A hopeful reign, auspiciously begun, 
Was darkened soon by foul iniquity. 
From crime to crime he mounted, till at length 
The nobles leagued their strength 
With a vexed people, and the tyrant chased ; 
And, on the vacant throne, his worthier Brother 
placed. 
From realm to realm the humbled Exile went, 
Suppliant for aid his kingdom to regain ; 
In many a court, and many a warrior's tent, 
He urged his persevering suit in vain. 
Him, in whose wretched heart ambition failed, 
Dire poverty assailed ; 
And, tired with slights his pride no more could 
brook, 
He towards his native country cast a longing look. 
Fair blew the wished-for wind — the voyage sped ; 
He landed ; and, by many dangers scared, 
' Poorly provided, poorly followed,' 
To Calaterium's forest he repaired. 
How changed from him who, born to highest place, 
Had swayed the royal mace, 
Flattered and feared, despised yet deified, 
In Troynovant, his seat by silver Thames's side ! 
From that wild region where the crownless King 
Lay in concealment with his scanty train, 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Supporting life by water from the spring, 
And such chance food as outlaws can obtain, 
Unto the few whom he esteems his friends 
A messenger he sends ; 
And from their secret loyalty requires 
Shelter and daily bread, — the sum of his desires. 
While he the issue waits, at early morn 
Wandering by stealth abroad, he chanced to hear 
A startling outcry made by hound and horn, 
From which the tusky wild boar flies in fear ; 
And, scouring toward him o'er the grassy plain, 
Behold the hunter train ! 
He bids his little company advance 
With seeming unconcern and steady countenance. 
The royal Elidure, who leads the chase, 
Hath checked his foaming courser : — can it be ! 
Methinks that I should recognise that face, 
Though much disguised by long adversity ! 
He gazed rejoicing, and again he gazed, 
Confounded and amazed — 
K It is the king, my brother ! " and, by sound 
Of his own voice confirmed, he leaps upon the 
ground. 
Long, strict, and tender was the embrace he gave, 
Feebly returned by daunted Artegal ; 
Whose natural affection doubts enslave, 
And apprehensions dark and criminal. 
Loth to restrain the moving interview, 
The attendant lords withdrew ; 
And, while they stood upon the plain apart, 
Thus Elidure, by words, relieved his struggling 
heart. 
a By heavenly Powers conducted, we have met ; 
— Brother ! to my knowledge lost so long, 
But neither lost to love, nor to regret, 
Nor to my wishes lost ; — forgive the wrong, 
(Such it may seem) if I thy crown have borne, 
Thy royal mantle worn : 
I was their natural guardian ; and 'tis just 
That now I should restore what hath been held in 
trust." 
A while the astonished Artegal stood mute, 
Then thus exclaimed : " To me, of titles shorn, 
And stripped of power ! me, feeble, destitute, 
j To me a kingdom ! spare the bitter scorn : 
If justice ruled the breast of foreign kings, 
Then, on the wide-spread wings 
Of war, had I returned to claim my right ; 
This will I here avow, not dreading thy despite." 

" I do not blame thee," Elidure replied ; 
" But, if my looks did with my words agree, 
I should at once be trusted, not defied, 
And thou from all disquietude be free. 
May the unsullied Goddess of the chase, 
Who to this blessed place 
At this blest moment led me, if I speak 
With insincere intent, on me her vengeance wreak? 
Were this same spear, which in my hand I grasp, 
The British sceptre, here would I to thee 
The symbol yield ; and would undo this clasp, 
If it confined the robe of sovereignty. 
Odious to me the pomp of regal court. 
And joyless sylvan sport, 
While thou art roving, wretched and forlorn, 
Thy coueh the dewy earth, thy roof the forest 
thorn !" 
Then Artegal thus spake : " I only sought, 
Within this realm a place of safe retreat ; 
Beware of rousing an ambitious thought ; 
Beware of kindling hopes, for me unmeet ! 
Thou art reputed wise, but in my mind 
Art pitiably blind : 
Full soon this generous purpose thou may'st rue, 
When that which has been done no wishes can undo. 
Who, when a crown is fixed upon his head, 
Would balance claim with claim, and right with 
right ? 
But thou — I know not how inspired, how led — 
Wouldst change the course of things in all men's 
sight ! 
And this for one who cannot imitate 
Thy virtue, who may hate : 
For, if, by such strange sacrifice restored, 
He reign, thou still must be his king, and sovereign 
lord; 
Lifted in magnanimity above 
Aught that my feeble nature could perform, 
Or even conceive ; surpassing me in love 
Far as in power the eagle doth the worm : 
I, Brother ! only should be king in name, 
And govern to my shame ; 
A shadow in a hated land, while all 
Of glad or willing service to thy share would fall." 
" Believe it not," said Elidure ; "respect 
Awaits on virtuous life, and ever most 
Attends on goodness with dominion decked, 
Which stands the universal empire's boast ; 
This can thy own experience testify : 
Nor shall thy foes deny 

ARTEGAL AND ELIDURE. 

 

That, in the gracious opening of thy reign, 
Our father's spirit seemed in thee to breathe again. 
And what if o'er that bright unbosoming 
Clouds of disgrace and envious fortune past ! 
Have we not seen the glories of the spring 
By veil of noontide darkness overcast ? 
The frith that glittered like a warrior's shield, 
The sky, the gay green field, 
Are vanished ; gladness ceases in the groves, 
And trepidation strikes the blackened mountain- 
coves. 
But is that gloom dissolved ? how passing clear 
Seems the wide world, far brighter than before ! 
Even so thy latent worth will re-appear, 
Gladdening the people's heart from shore to shore; 
For youthful faults ripe virtues shall atone ; 
Re-seated on thy throne, 
Proof shalt thou furnish that misfortune, pain, 
And sorrow, have confirmed thy native right to 
reign. 
But, not to overlook what thou may'st know, 
Thy enemies are neither weak nor few ; 
And circumspect must be our course, and slow, 
Or from my purpose ruin may ensue. 
Dismiss thy followers ; — let them calmly wait 
Such change in thy estate 
As I already have in thought devised ; 
And which, with caution due, may soon be realised." 
The Story tells what courses were pursued, 
Until king Elidure, with full consent 
Of all his peers, before the multitude, 
Rose, — and, to consummate this just intent, 
Did place upon his brother's head the crown, 
Relinquished by his own ; 
Then to his people cried, " Receive your lord, 
Gorbonian's first-born son, your rightful king 
restored ! " 
The people answered with a loud acclaim : 
Yet more ; — heart-smitten by the heroic deed, 
The reinstated Artegal became 
Earth's noblest penitent ; from bondage freed 
Of vice— thenceforth unable to subvert 
Or shake his high desert. 
Long did he reign ; and, when he died, the tear 
Of universal grief bedewed his honoured bier. 
Thus was a Brother by a Brother saved ; 
With whom a crown (temptation that hath set 
Discord in hearts of men till they have braved 
Their nearest kin with deadly purpose met) 

'Gainst duty weighed, and faithful love, did seem 
A thing of no esteem ; 
And, from this triumph of affection pure, 
He bore the lasting name of " pious Elidure ! " 
. 

TO A BUTTERFLY. 
I 've watch'd you now a full half-hour, 
Self-poised upon that yellow flower ; 
And, little Butterfly ! indeed 
I know not if you sleep or feed. 
How motionless ! — not frozen seas 
More motionless ! and then 
What joy awaits you, when the breeze 
Hath found you out among the trees, 
And calls you forth again ! 
This plot of orchard-ground is ours ; 
My trees they are, my Sister's flowers ; 
Here rest your wings when they are weary : 
Here lodge as in a sanctuary ! 
Come often to us, fear no wrong ; 
Sit near us on the bough ! 
We ' talk of sunshine and of song, 
And summer days, when we were young ; 
Sweet childish days, that were as long 
As twenty days are now. 
. 

A FAREWELL. 

Farewell, thou little Nook of mountain-ground, 
Thou rocky corner in the lowest stair 
Of that magnificent temple which doth bound 
One side of our whole vale with grandeur rare ; 
Sweet garden-orchard, eminently fair, 
The loveliest spot that man hath ever found, 
Farewell! — we leave thee to Heaven's peaceful care, 
Thee, and the Cottage which thou dost surround. 
Our boat is safely anchored by the shore, 
And there will safely ride when we are gone ; 
The flowering shrubs that deck our humble door 
Will prosper, though untended and alone : 
Fields, goods, and far-off chattels we have none : 
These narrow bounds contain our private store 
Of things earth makes, and sun doth shine upon ; 
Here are they in our sight — we have no more. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Sunshine and shower be with you, bud and bell ! 
For two months now in vain we shall be sought ; 
We leave you here in solitude to dwell 
With these our latest gifts of tender thought ; 
Thou, like the morning, in thy saffron coat, 
Bright gowan, and marsh-marigold, farewell ! 
Whom from the borders of the Lake we brought, 
And placed together near our rocky Well. 
We go for One to whom ye will be dear ; 
And she will prize this Bower, this Indian shed, 
Our own contrivance, Building without peer ! 
— A gentle Maid, whose heart is lowly bred, 
Whose pleasures are in wild fields gathered, 
With joyousness, and with a thoughtful cheer, 
Will come to you ; to you herself will wed ; 
And love the blessed life that we lead here. 
Dear Spot ! which we have watched' with tender heed, 
Bringing thee chosen plants and blossoms blown 
Among the distant mountains, flower and weed, 
Which thou hast taken to thee as thy own, 
Making all kindness registered and known ; 
Thou for our sakes, though Nature's child indeed, 
Fair in thyself and beautiful alone, 
Hast taken gifts which thou dost little need. 
And O most constant, yet most fickle Place, 
That hast thy wayward moods, as thou dost show 
To them who look not daily on thy face ; 
Who, being loved, in love no bounds dost know, 
And say'st, when we forsake thee, " Let them go ! " 
Thou easy-hearted Thing, with thy wild race 
Of weeds and flowers, till we return be slow, 
And travel with the year at a soft pace. 
Help us to tell Her tales of years gone by, 
And this sweet spring, the best beloved and best ; 
Joy will be flown in its mortality ; 
Something must stay to tell us of the rest. 
Here, thronged with primroses, the steep rock's 
breast 
Glittered at evening like a starry sky ; 
And in this bush our sparrow built her nest, 
Of which I sang one song that will not die 
happy Garden ! whose seclusion deep 
Hath been so friendly to industrious hours ; 
And to soft slumbers, that did gently steep 
Our spirits, carrying with them dreams of flowers, 
And wild notes warbled among leafy bowers ; 
Two burning months let summer overleap, 
And, coming back with Her who will be ours, 
Into thy bosom we again shall creep. I(i. 

STANZAS 
WRITTEN IN MY POCKET-COPY OF THOMSON'S CASTLE OF 
INDOLENCE. 
Within our happy Castle there dwelt One 
Whom without blame I may not overlook ; 
For never sun on living creature shone 
Who more devout enjoyment with us took : 
Here on his hours he hung as on a book, 
On his own time here would he float away, 
As doth a fly upon a summer brook ; 
But go to-morrow, or belike to-day, 
Seek for him, — he is fled ; and whither none can 
say. 
Thus often would he leave our peaceful home, 
And find elsewhere his business or delight ; 
Out of our Valley's limits did he roam : 
Full many a time, upon a stormy night, 
His voice came to us from the neighbouring height : 
Oft could we see him driving full in view 
At mid-day when the sun was shining bright ; 
What ill was on him, what he had to do, 
A mighty wonder bred among our quiet crew. 
Ah ! piteous sight it was to see this Man 
When he came back to us, a withered flower, — 
Or like a sinful creature, pale and wan. 
Down would he sit ; and without strength or power 
Look at the common grass from hour to hour : 
And oftentimes, how long I fear to say, 
Where apple-trees in blossom made a bower, 
Retired in that sunshiny shade he lay ; 
And, like a naked Indian, slept himself away. 
Great wonder to our gentle tribe it was 
Whenever from our Valley he withdrew ; 
For happier soul no living creature has 
Than he had, being here the long day through. 
Some thought he was a lover, and did woo : 
Some thought far worse of him, and judged him 
wrong; 
But verse was what he had been wedded to ; 
And his own mind did like a tempest strong 
Come to him thus, and drove the weary Wight 
along. 
With him there often walked in friendly guise, 
Or lay upon the moss by brook or tree, 
A noticeable Man with large grey eyes, 
And a pale face that seemed undoubtedly 
As if a blooming face it ought to be ; 



POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Heavy Ms low-hung Up did oft appear, 
Deprest by weight of musing Phantasy ; 
Profound his forehead was, though not severe ; 
Yet some did think that he had httle business here : 
Sweet heaven forefend ! his was a lawful right ; 
Noisy he was, and gamesome as a boy; 
His limbs would toss about him with delight 
Like branches when strong winds the trees annoy. 
Nor lacked his calmer hours device or toy 
To banish listlessness and irksome care ; 
He would have taught you how you might employ 
Yourself ; and many did to him repair, — 
And certes not in vain ; he had inventions rare. 
Expedients, too, of simplest sort he tried : 
Long blades of grass, plucked round him as he lay, 
Made, to his ear attentively applied, 
A pipe on which the wind would deftly play ; 
Glasses he had, that httle things display, 
The beetle panoplied in gems and gold, 
A mailed angel on a battle-day ; 
The mysteries that cups of flowers enfold, 
And all the gorgeous sights which fames do behold. 
He would entice that other Man to hear 
His music, and to view his imagery : 
And, sooth, these two were each to the other dear : 
No livelier love in such a place could be : 
There did they dwell — from earthly labour free, 
As happy spirits as were ever seen ; 
If but a bird, to keep them company, 
Or butterfly sate down, they were, I ween, 
As pleased as if the same had been a Maiden-queen. 
. 

LOUISA. 
AFTER ACCOMPANYING HER ON A MOUNTAIN EXCURSION. 
I met Louisa in the shade, 
And, having seen that lovely Maid, 
Why should I fear to say 
That, nymph-like, she is fleet and strong, 
And down the rocks can leap along 
Like rivulets in May ? 
She loves her fire, her cottage-home ; 
Yet o'er the moorland will she roam 
In weather rough and bleak ; 
And, when against the wind she strains, 
Oh ! might I kiss the mountain rains 
That sparkle on her cheek. 

Take aU that 's mine ' beneath the moon,' 
If I with her but half a noon 
May sit beneath the walls 
Of some old cave, or mossy nook, 
When up she winds along the brook 
To hunt the waterfalls. 
. 

Strange fits of passion have  known : 
And I will dare to tell, 
But in the Lover's ear alone, 
What once to me befel. 
When she I loved looked every day 
Fresh as a rose in June, 
I to her cottage bent my way, 
Beneath an evening-moon. 
Upon the moon I fixed my eye, 
All over the wide lea ; 
With quickening pace my horse drew nigh 
Those paths so dear to me. 
And now we reached the orchard-plot ; 
And, as we climbed the hill, 
The sinking moon to Lucy's cot 
Came near, and nearer still. 
In one of those sweet dreams I slept, 
Kind Nature's gentlest boon ! 
And all the while my eyes I kept 
On the descending moon. 
My horse moved on ; hoof after hoof 
He raised, and never stopped : 
When down behind the cottage roof, 
At once, the bright moon dropped,, 
What fond and wayward thoughts will slide 
Into a Lover's head ! 
" mercy ! " to myself I cried, 
" If Lucy should be dead ! " 
. 

She dwelt among the untrodden ways 
Beside the springs of Dove, 
A Maid whom there were none to praise 
And very few to love : 

 POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

A violet by a mossy stone 

Then, crouch no more on suppliant knee, 

Half hidden from the eye ! 

But scorn with scorn outbrave ; 

— Fair as a star, when only one 

A Briton, even in love, should be 

Is shining in the sky. 
She lived unknown, and few could know 

A subject, not a slave ! 
H. 


When Lucy ceased to be ; 

XI. 

But she is in her grave, and, oh, 


The difference to me ! 

TO 

. 

Look at the fate of summer flowers, 


Which blow at daybreak, droop ere even-song ; 


And, grieved for then.' brief date, confess that ours, 

IX. 

Measured by what we are and ought to be, 

I travelled among unknown men, 

Measured by all that, trembling, we foresee, 

In lands beyond the sea ; 

Is not so long ! 

Nor, England ! did I know till then 


What love I bore to thee. 

J f human Life do pass away, 


Perishing yet more swiftly than the flower, 

'Tis past, that melancholy dream ! 

If we are creatures of a whiter' s day ; 

Nor will I quit thy shore 

What space hath Virgin's beauty to disclose 

A second time ; for still I seem 

Her sweets, and triumph o'er the breathing rose ? 

To love thee more and more. 

Not even an hour ! 

Among thy mountains did I feel 
The joy of my desire ; 
And she I cherished turned her wheel 


The deepest grove whose foliage hid 
The happiest lovers Arcady might boast, 


Could not the entrance of this thought forbid : 

Beside an English fire. 

be thou wise as they, soul-gifted Maid ! 

Thy mornings showed, thy nights concealed 

Nor rate too high what must so quickly fade, 

The bowers where Lucy played ; 

So soon be lost. 

And thine too is the last green field 


That Lucy's eyes surveyed. 

Then shall love teach some virtuous Youth 

. 

' To draw, out of the object of his eyes,' 


The while on thee they gaze in simple truth, 
Hues more exalted, ' a refined Form,' 


X. 

That dreads not age, nor suffers from the worm, 


And never dies. 

Ere with cold beads of midnight dew 

. 

Had mingled tears of thine, 
I grieved, fond Youth ! that thou shouldst sue 



To haughty Geraldine. 

XII. 

Immoveable by generous sighs, 

THE FORSAKEN. 

She glories in a train 
Who drag, beneath our native skies, 


The peace which others seek they find ; 

The heaviest storms not longest last ; 

An oriental chain. 

o  


Heaven grants even to the guiltiest mind 

Pine not like them with arms across, 

An amnesty for what is past ; 

Forgetting in thy care 

When will my sentence be reversed ? 

How the fast-rooted trees can toss 

I only pray to know the worst ; 

Their branches in mid air. 

And wish as if my heart would burst. 

The humblest rivulet will take 

weary struggle ! silent years 

Its own wild liberties ; 

Tell seemingly no doubtful tale ; 

And, every day, the imprisoned lake 

And yet they leave it short, and fears 

Is flowing in the breeze. 

And hopes are strong and will prevail. 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

 

My calmest faith escapes not pain ; 
And, feeling that the hope is vain, 
I think that he will come again. 

Tis said, that some have died for love : 
And here and there a church-yard grave is found 
In the cold north's unhallowed ground, 
Because the wretched man himself had slain, 
His love was such a grievous pain. 
And there is one whom I five years have known ; 
He dwells alone 
Upon Helvellyn's side : 
He loved — the pretty Barbara died ; 
And thus he makes his moan : 
Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid 
When thus his moan he made : 
" Oh, move, thou Cottage, from behind that oak ! 
Or let the aged tree uprooted he, 
That in some other way yon smoke 
May mount into the sky ! 
The clouds pass on ; they from the heavens depart: 
I look — the sky is empty space ; 
I know not what I trace ; 
But when I cease to look, my hand is on my heart. 
! what a weight is in these shades ! Ye leaves, 
That murmur once so dear, when will it cease ? 
Your sound my heart of rest bereaves, 
It robs my heart of peace. 
Thou Thrush, that singest loud — and loud and free, 
Into yon row of willows flit, 
Upon that alder sit ; 
Or sing another song, or choose another tree. 
Roll back, sweet Rill ! back to thy mountain-bounds, 
And there for ever be thy waters chained ! 
For thou dost haunt the air with sounds 
That cannot be sustained ; 
If still beneath that pine-tree's ragged bough 
Headlong yon waterfall must come, 
Oh let it then be dumb ! 
Be anything, sweet Rill, but thatwhich thou artnow. 
Thou Eglantine, so bright with sunny showers, 
Proud as a rainbow spanning half the vale, 
Thou one fair shrub, oh ! shed thy flowers, 
And stir not in the gale. 

For thus to see thee nodding in the air, 
To see thy arch thus stretch and bend, 
Thus rise and thus descend, — ■ 
Disturbs me till the sight is more than I can bear. 
The Man who makes this feverish complaint 
Is one of giant stature, who could dance 
Equipped from head to foot in iron mail. 
Ah gentle Love ! if ever thought was thine 
To store up kindred hours for me, thy face 
Turn from me, gentle Love ! nor let me walk 
Within the sound of Emma's voice, nor know 
Such happiness as I have known to-day. 
. 

A COMPLAINT. 

There is a change — and I am poor ; 
Your love hath been, nor long ago, 
A fountain at my fond heart's door, 
Whose only business was to flow ; 
And flow it did ; not taking heed 
Of its own bounty, or my need. 
What happy moments did I count ! 
Blest was I then all bliss above ! 
Now, for that consecrated fount 
Of murmuring, sparkling, living love, 
What have I ? shall I dare to tell ? 
A comfortless and hidden well. 
A well of love — it may be deep — 
I trust it is, — and never dry : 
What matter ? if the waters sleep 
In silence and obscurity. 
— Such change, and at the very door 
Of my fond heart, hath made me poor. 

TO 
Let other bards of angels sing, 
Bright suns without a spot ; 
But thou art no such perfect thing 
Rejoice that thou art not ! 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Heed not tho' none should call thee fair ; 
So, Mary, let it be 
If nought in loveliness compare 
With what thou art to me. 
True beauty dwells in deep retreats, 
Whose veil is unremoved 
Till heart with heart in concord beats ? 
And the lover is beloved. 

Yes ! thou art fair, yet be not moved 
To scorn the declaration, 
That sometimes I in thee have loved 
My fancy's own creation. 
Imagination needs must stir ; 
Dear Maid, this truth believe, 
Minds that have nothing to confer 
Find little to perceive. 
Be pleased that nature made thee fit 
To feed my heart's devotion, 
By laws to which all Forms submit 
In sky, ah', earth, and ocean. 

How rich that forehead's calm expanse ! 
How bright that heaven-directed glance ! 
— Waft her to glory, winged Powers, 
Ere sorrow be renewed, 
And intercourse with mortal hours 
Bring back a humbler mood ! 
So looked Cecilia when she drew 
An Angel from his station ; 
So looked ; not ceasing to pursue 
Her tuneful adoration ! 
But hand and voice alike are still ; 
No sound here sweeps away the will 
That gave it birth : in service meek 
One upright arm sustains the cheek, 
And one across the bosom lies — 
That rose, and now forgets to rise, 
Subdued by breathless harmonies 
Of meditative feeling ; 
Mute strains from worlds beyond the skies, 
Through the pure light of female eyes, 
Their sanctity revealing ! 
. 

What heavenly smiles ! Lady mine 
Through my very heart they shine ; 
And, if my brow gives back their light, 
Do thou look gladly on the sight ; 
As the clear Moon with modest pride 
Beholds her own bright beams 
Reflected from the mountain's side 
And from the headlong streams. 

TO 

dearer far than light and life are dear, 
Full oft our human foresight I deplore ; 
Trembling, through my unworthiness, with fear 
That friends, by death disjoined, may meet no more! 
Misgivings, hard to vanquish or control, 
Mix with the day, and cross the hour of rest ; 
While all the future, for thy purer soul, 
With ' sober certainties ' of love is blest. 
That sigh of thine, not meant for human ear, 
Tells that these words thy humbleness offend ; 
Yet bear me up — else faltering in the rear 
Of a steep march : support me to the end. 
Peace settles where the intellect is meek, 
And Love is dutiful in thought and deed ; 
Through Thee communion with that Love I seek : 
The faith Heaven strengthens where he moulds the 
Creed. 
. 

LAMENT OF MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 
ON THE EVE OP A NEW YEAR. 
I. 
Smile of the Moon ! — for so I name 
That silent greeting from above ; 
A gentle flash of light that came 
From her whom drooping captives love ; 
Or art thou of still higher birth % 
Thou that didst part the clouds of earth, 
My torpor to reprove ! 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

 

Bright boon of pitying Heaven ! — alas, 
I may not trust thy placid cheer ! 
Pondering that Time to-night will pass 
The threshold of another year ; 
For years to me are sad and dull ; 
My very moments are too full 
Of hopelessness and fear. 

A Woman rules my prison's key ; 
A sister Queen, against the bent 
Of law and holiest sympathy, 
Detains me, doubtful of the event ; 
Great God, who feel'st for my distress, 
My thoughts are all that I possess, 
keep them innocent ! 

And yet, the soul-awakening gleam, 
That struck perchance the farthest cone 
Of Scotland's rocky wilds, did seem 
To visit me, and me alone ; 
Me, unapproached by any friend, 
Save those who to my sorrows lend 
Tears due unto their own. 

To-night the church-tower bells will r inn- 
Through these wide realms a festive peal 
To the new year a welcoming ; 
A tuneful offering for the weal 
Of happy millions lulled in sleep ; 
While I am forced to watch and weep, 
By wounds that may not heal. 

Born all too high, by wedlock raised 
Still higher — to be cast thus low ! 
Would that mine eyes had never gazed 
On aught of more ambitious show 
Than the sweet flowerets of the fields ! 
— It is my royal state that yields 
This bitterness of woe. 


Yet how ? — for I, if there be truth 
In the world's voice, was passing fair ; 
And beauty, for confiding youth, 
Those shocks of passion can prepare 
That kill the bloom before its time ; 
And blanch, without the owner's crime, 
The most resplendent hair. 

Unblest distinction ! showered on me 
To bind a lingering life in chains : 
All that could quit my grasp, or flee, 
Is gone ; — but not the subtle stains 
Fixed in the spirit ; for even here 
Can I be proud that jealous fear 
Of what I was remains. 

Farewell desire of human aid, 
Which abject mortals vainly court ! 
By friends deceived, by foes betrayed, 
Of fears the prey, of hopes the sport ; 
Nought but the world-redeeming Cross 
Is able to supply my loss, 
My burthen to support. 

Hark ! the death-note of the year 
Sounded by the castle-clock ! 
From her sunk eyes a stagnant tear 
Stole forth, unsettled by the shock ; 
But oft the woods renewed their green, 
Ere the tired head of Scotland's Queen 
Reposed upon the block ! 

H 

XXI. 
THE COMPLAINT 
OF A FORSAKEN INDIAN WOMAN. 
[When a Northern Indian, from sickness, is unablr to con- 
tinue his journey with his companions, he is left behind, 
covered over with deer-skins, and is supplied with water, 
food, and fuel, if the situation of the place will afford it. 
He is informed of the track which his companions intend 
to pursue, and if he be unable to follow, or overtake 
them, he perishes alone in the desert ; unless he should 
have the good fortune to fall in with some other tribes 
of Indians. The females are equally, or still more, 
exposed to the same fate. See that very interesting 
work Hkarnk's Journey from Hudson's Bay to the 
Northern Ocean. In the high northern latitudes, as 
the same writer informs us, when the northern lights 
vary their position in the air, they make a rustling and 
a crackling noise, as alluded to in the following poem.] 

Before I see another day, 
Oh let my body die away ! 
In sleep I heard the northern gleams ; 
The stars, they were among my dreams 
In rustling conflict through the skies, 
I heard,  saw the flashes drive. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

And yet they are upon my eyes, 
And yet I am alive ; 
Before I see another day, 
Oh let my body die away ! 

My fire is dead : it knew no pain ; 
Yet is it dead, and I remain : 
All stiff with ice the ashes lie ; 
And they are dead, and I will die. 
When I was well, I wished to live, 
For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire 
But they to me no joy can give, 
No pleasure now, and no desire. 
Then here contented will I he ! 
Alone, I cannot fear to die. 

Alas ! ye might have dragged me on 
Another day, a single one ! 
Too soon I yielded to despair ; 
Why did ye listen to my prayer ? 
When ye were gone my limbs were stronger 
And oh, how grievously I rue, 
That, afterwards, a little longer, 
My friends, I did not follow you ! 
For strong and without pain I lay, 
Dear friends, when ye were gone away. 

My Child ! they gave thee to another, 
A woman who was not thy mother. 
When from my arms my Babe they took, 
On me how strangely did he look ! 
Through his whole body something ran, 
A most strange working did I see ; 
— As if he strove to be a man, 
That he might pull the sledge for me : 
And then he stretched his arms, how wild ! 
Oh mercy ! like a helpless child. 

My little joy ! my little pride ! 
In two days more I must have died. 
Then do not weep and grieve for me ; 
I feel I must have died with thee. 
wind, that o'er my head art flying 
The way my friends their course did bend, 
 should not feel the pain of dying, 
Could I with thee a message send ; 
Too soon, my friends, ye went away ; 
For I had many things to say. 

I ' follow you across the snow ; 
Ye travel heavily and slow ; 
In spite of all my weary pain 
I ' look upon your tents again. 
■ — My fire is dead, and snowy white 
The water which beside it stood : 
The wolf has come to me to-night, 
And he has stolen away my food. 
For ever left alone am I ; 
Then wherefore should I fear to die ? 

vtr. K 
Young as I am, my course is run, 
I shall not see another sun ; 
I cannot lift my limbs to know 
If they have any life or no. 
My poor forsaken Child, if I 
For once could have thee close to me, 
With happy heart I then would die, 
And my last thought would happy be ; 
But thou, dear Babe, art far away, 
Nor shall I see another day. 

. 

THE LAST OF THE FLOCK. 
i. 
In distant countries have I been, 
And yet I have not often seen 
A healthy man, a man full grown, 
Weep in the public roads, alone. 
But such a one, on English ground, 
And in. the broad highway, I met ; 
Along the broad highway he came, 
His cheeks with tears were wet : 
Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad ; 
And in his amis a Lamb he had. 

He saw me, and he turned aside, 
As if he wished himself to hide : 
And with his coat did then essay 
To wipe those briny tears away. 
I followed him, and said, " My friend, 
What ails you ? wherefore weep you so ? " 
— " Shame on me, Sir ! this lusty Lamb, 
He makes my tears to flow. 
To-day I fetched him from the rock ; 
He is the last of all my flock. 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS.  

in. 

'Till thirty were not left alive 

When I was young, a single man, 

They dwindled, dwindled, one by one ; 

And after youthful follies ran, 

And I may say, that many a time 

Though little given to care and thought, 

I wished they all were gone — 

Yet, so it was, an ewe I bought ; 

Reckless of what might come at last 

And other sheep from her I raised, 

Were but the bitter struggle past. 

As healthy sheep as you might see ; 


And then I married, and was rich 

VTTT. 

As I could wish to be ; 

To wicked deeds I was inclined, 


And wicked fancies crossed my mind ; 

Of sheep I numbered a full score, 

And every man I chanced to see, 

And every year increased my store. 

I thought he knew some ill of me : 


No peace, no comfort could I find, 

TV. 

No ease, within doors or without ; 

Year after year my stock it grew ; 

And, crazily and wearily 

And from this one, this single ewe, 

I went my work about ; 

Full fifty comely sheep I raised, 

And oft was moved to flee from home, 

As fine a flock as ever grazed ! 

And hide my head where wild beasts roam. 

Upon the Quantock hills they fed ; 

They throve, and we at home did thrive : 

IX. 

— This lusty Lamb of all my store 

Sir ! 'twas a precious flock to me, 

Is all that is alive ; 

As dear as my own children be ; 

And now I care not if we die, 

For daily with my growing store 

And perish all of poverty. 

I loved my children more and more. 


Alas ! it was an evil time ; 

V. 

God cursed me in my sore distress ; 

Six Children, Sir ! had I to feed ; 

 prayed, yet every day I thought 

Hard labour in a time of need ! 

I loved my children less ; 

My pride was tamed, and in our grief 

And every week, and every day, 

I of the Parish asked relief. 

My flock it seemed to melt away. 

They said, I was a wealthy man ; 


My sheep upon the uplands fed, 

X. 

And it was fit that thence I took 

They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see ! 

Whereof to buy us bread. 

From ten to five, from five to three, 

' Do this : how can we give to you,' 

A lamb, a wether, and a ewe ; — 

They cried, ' what to the poor is due ? ' 

And then at last from three to two ; 


And, of my fifty, yesterday 

vr. 

I had but only one : 

I sold a sheep, as they had said, 

And here it lies upon my arm, 

And bought my little children bread, 

Alas ! and I have none ; — 

And they were healthy with their food ; 

To-day I fetched it from the rock ; 

For me — it never did me good. 

It is the last of all my flock." 

A woeful time it was for me, 
To see the end of all my gains, 

. 


The pretty flock which I had reared 


With all my care and pains, 

XXIII. 

To see it melt like snow away — 


For me it was a woeful day. 

REPENTANCE. 


A PASTORAL BALLAD. 

VII. 

The fields which with covetous spirit we sold, 

Another still ! and still another ! 

Those beautiful fields, the delight of the day, 

A little lamb, and then its mother ! 

Would have brought us more good than a burthen 

It was a vein that never stopped — 

of gold, 

Like blood-drops from my heart they dropped. 

Could we but have been as contented as they. 
G  

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

When the troublesome Tempter beset us, said I, 
' Let him come, with his purse proudly grasped in 
his hand ; 
But, Allan, be true to me, Allan, — we'll die 
Before he shall go with an inch of the land ! ' 
There dwelt we, as happy as birds in their bowers ; 
Unfettered as bees that in gardens abide ; 
We could do what we liked with the land, it was ours ; 
And for us the brook murmured that ran by its side. 
But now we are strangers, go early or late ; 
And often, like one overburthened with sin, 
With my hand on the latch of the half-opened gate, 
I look at the fields, but I cannot go in ! 
When I walk by the hedge on a bright summer's 
day, 
Or sit in the shade of my grandfather's tree, 
A stern face it puts on, as if ready to say, 
'What ails you, that you must come creeping to me!' 
With our pastures about ufi, we could not be sad ; 
Our comfort was near if we ever were crost ; 
But the comfort, the blessings, and wealth that we 
had, 
We slighted them all, — and our birth-right was lost. 
Oh, ill-judging sire of an innocent son 
Who must now be a wanderer ! but peace to that 
strain ! 
Think of evening's repose when ourlabourwas done, 
The sabbath's return ; and its leisure's soft chain ! 
And in sickness, if night had been sparing of sleep, 
How cheerful, at sunrise, the hill where I stood, 
Looking down on the kine,and our treasure of sheep 
That besprinkled the field ; 'twas like youth in my 
blood ! 
Now I cleave to the house, and am dull as a snail ; 
And, oftentimes, hear the church-bell with a sigh, 
That follows the thought — We've no land in the vale, 
Save six feet of earth where our forefathers lie ! 
. 

XXIV. 
THE AFFLICTION OF MARGARET 
r. 
Where art thou, my beloved Son, 
Where art thou, worse to me than dead ' 
Oh find me, prosperous or undone ! 
Or, if the grave be now thy bed, 

Why am I ignorant of the same 
That I may rest ; and neither blame 
Nor sorrow may attend thy name ? 

Seven years, alas ! to have received 
No tidings of an only child ; 
To have despaired, have hoped, believed, 
And been for evermore beguiled ; 
Sometimes with thoughts of very bliss ! 
I catch at them, and then I miss ; 
Was ever darkness like to this \ 

He was among the prime in worth, 
An object beauteous to behold ; 
Well born, well bred ; I sent him forth 
Ingenuous, innocent, and bold : 
If things ensued that wanted grace, 
As hath been said, they were not base ; 
And never blush was on my face. 

Ah ! little doth the young-one dream, 
When full of play and childish cares, 
What power is in his wildest scream, 
Heard by his mother unawares ! 
He knows it not, he cannot guess : 
Years to a mother bring distress ; 
But do not make her love the less. 

Neglect me ! no, I suffered long 
From that ill thought ; and, being blind, 
Said, ' Pride shall help me in my wrong 
Kind mother have I been, as kind 
As ever breathed : ' and that is true ; 
I 've wet my path with tears like dew, 
Weeping for him when no one knew. 

My Son, if thou be humbled, poor, 
Hopeless of honour and of gain, 
Oh  do not dread thy mother's door ; 
Think not of me with grief and pain : 
I now can see with better eyes ; 
And worldly grandeur I despise, 
And fortune with her gifts and lies. 

Alas ! the fowls of heaven have wings, 
And blasts of heaven will aid their flight; 
They mount — how short a voyage brings 
The wanderers back to their delight ! 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS.  

Chains tie us down by land and sea ; 

There 's nothing stirring in the house 

And wishes, vain as mine, may he 

Save one wee, hungry, nibbling mouse, 

All that is left to comfort thee. 

Then why so busy thou  

vrn. 

Nay ! start not at that sparkling fight ; 

Perhaps some dungeon hears thee groan, 

'Tis but the moon that shines so bright 

Maimed, mangled by inhuman men ; 

On the window pane bedropped with rain : 

Or thou upon a desert thrown 

Then, little Darling ! sleep again, 

Inheritest the lion's den ; 

And wake when it is day. 

Or hast been summoned to the deep, 

. 

Thou, thou and all thy mates, to keep 


An incommunicable sleep. 

XXVI. 

IX. 

MATERNAL GRIEF. 

I look for ghosts ; but none will force 

Departed Child ! I could forget thee once 

Their way to me : 'tis falsely said 

Though at my bosom nursed ; this woeful gain 

That there was ever intercourse 

Thy dissolution brings, that in my soul 

Between the living and the dead ; 

Is present and perpetually abides 

For, surely, then I should have sight 

A shadow, never, never to be disjdaced 

Of him I wait for day and night, 

By the returning substance, seen or touched, 

With love and longings infinite. 

Seen by mine eyes, or clasped in my embrace. 


Absence and death how differ they ! and how 

X. 

Shall I admit that nothing can restore 

My apprehensions come in crowds ; 

What one short sigh so easily removed ? — 

I dread the rustling of the grass ; 
The very shadows of the clouds 

Death, life, and sleep, reality and thought, 
Assist me, God, their boundaries to know, 

Have power to shake me as they pass : 

teach me calm submission to thy Will ! 

I question things and do not find 


One that will answer to my mind ; 

The Child she mourned had overstepped the pale 

And all the world appears unkind. 

Of Infancy, but still did breathe the air 


That sanctifies its confines, and partook 

Xf. 

Reflected beams of that celestial light 

Beyond participation lie 
My troubles, and beyond relief : 
If any chance to heave a sigh, 

To all the Little-ones on sinful earth 

Not unvouchsafed — a fight that warmed and 
cheered 
Those several qualities of heart and mind 

They pity me, and not my grief. 
Then come to me, my Son, or send 
Some tidings that my woes may end ; 
I have no other earthly friend ! 
. 

Which, in her own blest nature, rooted deep, 

Daily before the Mother's watchful eye, 

And not hers only, their peculiar charms 


Unfolded, — beauty, for its present self, 
And for its promises to future years, 


XXV. 

With not unfrequent rapture fondly hailed. 

THE COTTAGER TO HER INFANT. 

Have you espied upon a dewy lawn 


A pair of Leverets each provoking each 

BY MY SISTER. 

To a continuance of their fearless sport, 

The days are cold, the nights are long, 

Two separate Creatures in their severed gifts 

The north-wind sings a doleful song ; 

Abounding, but so fashioned that, in all 

Then hush again upon my breast ; 

That Nature prompts them to display, their looks, 

All merry things are now at rest, 

Their starts of motion and their fits of rest, 

Save thee, my pretty Love ! 

An undistinguishable style appears 


And character of gladness, as if Spring 

The kitten sleeps upon the hearth, 

Lodged in their innocent bosoms, and the spirit 

The crickets long have ceased their mirth ; 

Of the rejoicing morning were their own. 

( 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Such union, in the lovely Girl maintained 
And her twin Brother, had the parent seen, 
Ere, pouncing like a ravenous bird of prey, 
Death in a moment parted them, and left 
The Mother, in her turns of anguish, worse 
Than desolate ; for oft-times from the sound 
Of the survivor's sweetest voice (dear child, 
He knew it not) and from his happiest looks, 
Did she extract the food of self-reproach, 
As one that lived ungrateful for the stay 
By Heaven afforded to uphold her maimed 
And tottering spirit. And full oft the Boy, 
Now first acquainted with distress and grief, 
Shrunk from his Mother's presence, shunned with 
fear 
Her sad approach, and stole away to find, 
In his known haunts of joy where'er he might, 
A more congenial object. But, as time 
Softened her pangs and reconciled the child 
To what he saw, he gradually returned, 
Like a scared Bird encouraged to renew 
A broken intercourse ; and, while his eyes 
Were yet with pensive fear and gentle awe 
Turned upon her who bore him, she would stoop 
To imprint a kiss that lacked not power to spread 
Faint colour over both then' pallid cheeks, 
And stilled his tremidous lip. Thus they were calmed 
And cheered ; and now together breathe fresh air 
In open fields ; and when the glare of day 
Is gone, and twilight to the Mother's wish 
Befriends the observance, readily they join 
In walks whose boundary is the lost One's grave, 
Which he with flowers hath planted, finding there 
Amusement, where the Mother does not miss 
Dear consolation, kneeling on the turf 
In prayer, yet blending with that solemn rite 
Of pious faith the vanities of grief ; 
For such, by pitying Angels and by Spirits 
Transferred to regions upon which the clouds 
Of our weak nature rest not, must be deemed 
Those willing tears, and unforbidden sighs, 
And all those tokens of a cherished sorrow, 
Which, soothed and sweetened by the grace of 
Heaven 
As now it is, seems to her own fond heart, 
Immortal as the love that gave it being. 

XXVII. 
THE SAILOR'S MOTHER. 
One morning (raw it was and wet — 
A foggy day in winter time) 
A Woman on the road I met, 
Not old, though something past her prime : 

Majestic in her person, tall and straight ; 
And like a Roman matron's was her mien and gait. 
The ancient spirit is not dead ; 
Old times, thought I, are breathing there ; 
Proud was I that my country bred 
Such strength, a dignity so fair : 
She begged an alms, like one in poor estate ; 
I looked at her again, nor did my pride abate. 
When from these lofty thoughts I woke, 
" What is it," said I, " that you bear, 
Beneath the covert of your Cloak, 
Protected from this cold damp air ? " 
She answered, soon as she the question heard, 
" A simple burthen, Sir, a little Singing-bird." 
And, thus continuing, she said, 
" I had a Son, who many a day 
Sailed on the seas, but he is dead ; 
In Denmark he was cast away : 
And I have travelled weary miles to see 
If aught which he had owned might still remain 
for me. 
The bird and cage they both were his : 
'Twas my Son's bird ; and neat and trim 
He kept it : many voyages 
The singing-bird had gone with him ; 
When last he sailed, he left the bird behind ; 
From bodings, as might be, that hung upon his mind . 
He to a fellow-lodger's care 
Had left it, to be watched and fed, 
And pipe its song in safety ; — there 
I found it when my Son was dead ; 
And now, God help me for my little wit ! 
I bear it with me, Sir ; — he took so much deb'ght 
in it." 
). 



THE CHILDLESS FATHER. 
" Up, Timothy, up with your staff and away ! 
Not a soul in the village this morning will stay ; 
The hare has just started from Hamilton's grounds, 
And Skiddaw is glad with the cry of the hounds." 
— Of coats and of jackets grey, scarlet, and green, 
On the slopes of the pastures all colours were seen ; 
With their comely blue aprons, and caps white as 
snow, 
The girls on the hills made a holiday show. 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

 

Fresh sprigs of green box-wood, not six months 
before, 
Filled the funeral basin at Timothy's door ; 
A coffin through Timothy's threshold had past ; 
One Child did it bear, and that Child was his last. 
Now fast up the dell came the noise and the fray, 
The horse and the horn, and the hark ! hark away ! 
Old Timothy took up his staff, and he shut 
With a leisurely motion the door of his hut. 
Perhaps to himself at that moment he said ; 
' The key I must take, for my Ellen is dead.' 
But of this in my ears not a word did he speak ; 
And he went to the chase with a tear on his cheek. 
. 

XXIX. 
THE EMIGRANT MOTHER. 
Once in a lonely hamlet I sojourned 
In which a Lady driven from France did dwell ; 
The big and lesser griefs with which she mourned, 
In friendship she to me would often tell. 
This Lady, dwelling upon British ground, 
Where she was childless, daily would repair 
To a poor neighbouring cottage ; as I found, 
For sake of a young Child whose home was there. 
Once having seen her clasp with fond embrace 
This Child, I chanted to myself a lay, 
Endeavouring, in our English tongue, to trace 
Such things as she unto the Babe might say : 
And thus, from what I heard and knew, or guessed, 
My song the workings of her heart expressed. 

" Dear Babe, thou daughter of another, 
One moment let me be thy mother ! 
An infant's face and looks are thine 
And sure a mother's heart is mine : 
Thy own dear mother 's far away, 
At labour in the harvest field : 
Thy little sister is at play ; — 
What warmth, what comfort would it yield 
To my poor heart, if thou wouldst be 
One little hour a child to me ! 

 In several parts of the North of England, when a 
funeral takes place, a basin full of sprigs of box-wood is 
placed at the door of the house from which the coffin is 
taken up, and each person who attends the funeral ordi- 
narily takes a sprig of this box-wood, and throws it into 
the grave of the deceased. 

Across the waters I am come, 
And I have left a babe at home : 
A long, long way of land and sea ! 
Come to me — I 'm no enemy : 
I am the same who at thy side 
Sate yesterday, and made a nest 
For thee, sweet Baby ! — thou hast tried, 
Thou know'st the pillow of my breast ; 
Good, good art thou : — alas ! to me 
Far more than I can be to thee. 

Here, little Darling, dost thou he ; 
An infant thou, a mother I ! 
Mine wilt thou be, thou hast no fears ; 
Mine art thou — spite of these my tears. 
Alas ! before I left the spot, 
My baby and its dwellhig-place ; 
The nurse said to me, ' Tears should not 
Be shed upon an infant's face, 
It was unlucky '—no, no, no ; 
No truth is in them who say so ! 

My own dear Little-one will sigh, 
Sweet Babe ! and they will let him die. 
' He pines,' they ' say, ' it is his doom, 
And you may see his hour is come.' 
Oh ! had he but thy cheerful smiles, 
Limbs stout as thine, and lips as gay, 
Thy looks, thy cunning, and thy wiles, 
And countenance like a summer's day, 
They would have hopes of him ; — and then 
I should behold his face again ! 

'Tis gone — like dreams that we forget ; 
There was a smile or two — yet — yet 
I can remember them, I see 
The smiles, worth all the world to me. 
Dear Baby ! I must lay thee down ; 
Thou troublest me with strange alarms ; 
Smiles hast thou, bright ones of thy own ; 
I cannot keep thee in my arms ; 
For they confound me ; — where — where is 
That last, that sweetest smile of his \ 

Oh ! how I love thee ! — we will stay 
Together hei'e this one half day. 
My sister's child, who bears my name, 
From France to sheltering England came : 

( 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

She with her mother crossed the sea ; 
The babe and mother near me dwell : 
Yet does my yearning heart to thee 
Turn rather, though I love her well : 
Rest, little Stranger, rest thee here ! 
Never was any child more dear ! 
vrr. 
— I cannot help it ; ill intent 
I 've none, my pretty Innocent ! 
I weep — I know they do thee wrong, 
These tears — and my poor idle tongue. 
Oh, what a kiss was that ! my cheek 
How cold it is ! but thou art good ; 
Thine eyes are on me — they would speak, 
I think, to help me if they could. 
Blessings upon that soft, warm face, 
My heart again is in its place ! 
Villi 
While thou art mine, my little Love, 
This cannot be a sorrowful grove ; 
Contentment, hope, and mother's glee, 
I seem to find them all in thee : 
Here 's grass to play with, here are flowers ; 
I ' call thee by my darling's name ; 
Thou hast, I think, a look of ours, 
Thy features seem to me the same ; 
His little sister thou shalt be ; 
And, when once more my home I see, 
I ' tell him many tales of Thee." 
. 

VAUDRACOUR AND JULIA. 
The following tale was written as an Episode, in a work 
from which its length may perhaps exclude it. The 
facts are true ; no invention as to these has bei j n 
exercised, as none was needed. 
happy time of youthful lovers (thus 
My story may begin) balmy time, 
In which a love-knot on a lady's brow 
Is fairer than the fairest star in heaven ! 
To such inheritance of blessed fancy 
(Fancy that sports more desperately with minds 
Than ever fortune hath been known to do) 
The high-born Vaudracour was brought, by years 
Whose progress had a little overstepped 
His stripling prime. A town of small repute, 
Among the vine-clad mountains of Auvergne, 
Was the Youth's birth-place. There he wooed a 
Maid 
Who heard the heart-felt music of his suit 

With answering vows. Plebeian was the stock, 
Plebeian, though ingenuous, the stock, 
From which her graces and her honours sprung : 
And hence the father of the enamoured Youih, 
With haughty indignation, spurned the thought 
Of such alliance. — From their cradles up, 
With but a step between their several homes, 
Twins had they been in pleasure ; after strife 
And petty quarrels, had grown fond again ; 
Each other's advocate, each other's stay ; 
And, in their happiest moments, not content, 
If more divided than a sportive pair 
Of sea-fowl, conscious both that they are hovering 
Within the eddy of a common blast, 
Or hidden only by the concave depth 
Of neighbouring billows from each other's sight. 
Thus, not without concurrence of an age 
Unknown to memory, was an earnest given 
By ready nature for a life of love, 
For endless constancy, and placid truth ; 
But whatsoe'er of such rare treasure lay 
Reserved, had fate permitted, for support 
Of their maturer years, his present mind 
Was under fascination ; — he beheld 
A vision, and adored the thing he saw. 
Arabian fiction never filled the world 
With half the wonders that were wrought for him. 
Earth breathed in one great presence of the spring ; 
Life turned the meanest of her implements, 
Before his eyes, to price above all gold ; 
The house she dwelt in was a sainted shrine ; 
Her chamber-window did surpass in glory 
The portals of the dawn ; all paradise 
Could, by the simple opening of a door, 
Let itself in upon him : — pathways, walks, 
Swarmed with enchantment, till his spirit sank, 
Surcharged, within him, overblest to move 
Beneath a sun that wakes a weary world 
To its dull round of ordinary cares ; 
A man too happy for mortality ! 
So passed the time, till whether through effect 
Of some unguarded moment that dissolved 
Virtuous restraint — ah, speak it, think it, not ! 
Deem rather that the fervent Youth, who saw 
So many bars between his present state 
And the dear haven where he wished to be 
In honourable wedlock with his Love, 
Was in his judgment tempted to decline 
To perilous weakness., and entrust his cause 
To nature for a happy end of all ; 
Deem that by such fond hope the Youth was swayed, 
And bear with then' transgression, when  add 

VAUDRACOUR AND JULIA. 

 

That Julia, wanting yet the name of wife, 
Carried about her for a secret grief 
The promise of a mother. 
To conceal 
The threatened shame, the parents of the Maid 
Found means to hurry her away by night, 
And unforewarned, that in some distant spot 
She might remain shrouded in privacy, 
Until the babe was born. When morning came, 
The Lover, thus bereft, stung with his loss, 
And all uncertain whither he should turn, 
Chafed like a wild beast in the toils ; but soon 
Discovering traces of the fugitives, 
Their steps he followed to the Maid's retreat. 
Easily may the sequel be divined — 
Walks to and fro — watchings at every hour ; 
And the fair Captive, who, whene'er she may, 
Is busy at her casement as the swallow 
Fluttering its pinions, almost within reach, 
About the pendent nest, did thus espy 
Her Lover ! — thence a stolen interview, 
Accomplished under friendly shade of night. 
I pass the raptures of the pair ; — such theme 
Is, by innumerable poets, touched 
In more delightful verse than skill of mine 
Could fashion ; chiefly by that darling bard 
Who told of Juliet and her Romeo, 
And of the lark's note heard before its time, 
And of the streaks that laced the severing clouds 
In the unrelenting east.— Through all her courts 
The vacant city slept ; the busy winds, 
That keep no certain intervals of rest, 
Moved not ; meanwhile the galaxy displayed 
Her fires, that like mysterious pulses beat 
Aloft ; — momentous but uneasy bliss ! 
To their full hearts the universe seemed hung 
On that brief meeting's slender filament ! 
They parted ; and the generous Vaudracour 
Reached speedily the native threshold, bent 
On making (so the Lovers had agreed) 
A sacrifice of birthright to attain 
A final portion from his' father's hand ; 
Which granted, Bride and Bridegroom then would 
flee 
To some remote and solitary place, 
Shady as night, and beautiful as heaven, 
Where they may live, with no one to behold 
Their happiness, or to disturb their love. 
But now of this no whisper ; not the less, 
If ever an obtrusive word were dropped 
Touching the matter of his passion, still, 
In his stern father's hearing, Vaudracour 

Persisted openly that death alone 
Should abrogate his human privilege 
Divine, of swearing everlasting truth, 
Upon the altar, to the Maid he loved. 
"You shall be baffled in your mad intent 
If there be justice in the court of France," 
Muttered the Father. — From these words the Youth 
Conceived a terror ; and, by night or day, 
Stirred nowhere without weapons, that full soon 
Found dreadful provocation : for at night 
When to his chamber he retired, attempt 
Was made to seize him by three armed men, 
Acting, in furtherance of the father's will, 
Under a private signet of the State. 
One the rash Youth's ungovernable hand 
Slew, and as quickly to a second gave 
A perilous wound — he shuddered to behold 
The breathless corse ; then peacefully resigned 
His person to the law, was lodged in prison, 
And wore the fetters of a criminal. 
Have you observed a tuft of winged seed 
That, from the dandelion's naked stalk, 
Mounted aloft, is suffered not to use 
Its natural gifts for purposes of rest, 
Driven by the autumnal whirlwind to and fro 
Through the wide element % or have you marked 
The heavier substance of a leaf-clad bough, 
Within the vortex of a foaming flood, 
Tormented ? by such aid you may conceive 
The perturbation that ensued ; — ah, no ! 
Desperate the Maid — the Youth is stained with 
blood ; 
Unmatchable on earth is their disquiet ! 
Yet as the troubled seed and tortured bough 
Is Man, subjected to despotic sway. 
For him, by private influence with the Court, 
Was pardon gained, and liberty procured; 
But not without exaction of a pledge, 
Which liberty and love dispersed in air. 
He flew to her from whom they would divide him — 
He clove to her who could not give him peace — 
Yea, his first word of greeting was, — " All right 
Is gone from me ; my lately-towering hopes, 
To the least fibre of their lowest root, 
Are withered ; thou no longer canst be mine, , 
I thine — the conscience-stricken must not woo 
The unruffled Innocent, — I see thy face, 
Behold thee, and my misery is complete ! " 
" One,are wenot ? " exclaimed the Maiden — " One, 
For innocence and youth, for weal and woe ? " 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Then with the father's name she coupled words 
Of vehement indignation ; but the Youth 
Checked her with filial meekness ; for no thought 
Uncharitable crossed his mind, no sense 
Of hasty anger rising in the eclipse 
Of true domestic loyalty, did e'er 
Find place within his bosom. — Once again 
The persevering wedge of tyranny 
Achieved their separation : and once more 
Were they united, — to be yet again 
Disparted, pitiable lot ! But here 
A portion of the tale may well be left 
In silence, though my memory could add 
Much how the Youth, in scanty space of time, 
Was traversed from without ; much, too, of thoughts 
That occupied his days in so'.itude 
Under privation and restraint ; and what, 
Through dark and shapeless fear of tilings to come, 
And what, through strong compunction for the past, 
He suffered — breaking down hi heart and mind ! 
Doomed to a third and last captivity, 
His freedom he recovered on the eve 
Of Julia's travail. When the babe was born, 
Its presence tempted him to cherish schemes 
Of future happiness. "You shall return, 
Julia," said he, "and to your father's house 
Go with the child. — You have been wretched ; yet 
The silver shower, whose reckless burthen weighs 
Too heavily upon the lily's head, 
Oft leaves a saving moisture at its root. 
Malice, beholding you, will melt away. 
Go ! — 'tis a town where both of us were born ; 
None will reproach you, for our truth is known ; 
And if, amid those once-bright bowers, our fate 
Remain unpitied, pity is not in man. 
With ornaments — the prettiest, nature yields 
Or art can fashion, shall you deck our boy, 
And feed his countenance with your own sweet looks 
Till no one can resist him. — Now, even now, 
I see him sporting on the sunny lawn ; 
My father from the window sees Mm too ; 
Startled, as if some new-created thing 
Enriched the earth, or Faery of the woods 
Bounded before him ; — but the unweeting Child 
Shall by his beauty win his grandsire's heart 
So that it shall be softened, and our loves 
End happily, as they began ! " 
These gleams 
Appeared but seldom ; oftener was he seen 
Propping a pale and melancholy face 
Upon the Mother's bosom ; resting thus 
His head upon one breast, while from the other 
The Babe was drawing in its quiet food. 

— That pillow is no longer to be thine, 
Fond Youth ! that mournful solace now must pass 
Into the list of things t'nat cannot be ! 
Unwedded Julia, terror-smitten, hears 
The sentence, by her mother's lip pronounced, 
That dooms her to a convent. — Who shall tell, 
Who dares report, the tidings to the lord 
Of her affections ? so they blindly asked 
Who knew not to what quiet depths a weight 
Of agony had pressed the Sufferer down : 
The word, by others dreaded, he can hear 
Composed and silent, without visible sign 
Of even the least emotion. Noting this, 
When the impatient object of his love 
Upbraided him with slackness, he returned 
No answer, only took the mother's hand 
And kissed it ; seemingly devoid of pain, 
Or care, that what so tenderly he pressed, 
Was a dependant on the obdurate heart 
Of one who came to disunite their lives 
For ever — sad alternative ! preferred, 
By the unbending Parents of the Maid, 
To secret 'spousals meanly disavowed. 
—So be it ! 
In the city he remained 
A season after Julia had withdrawn 
To those religious walls. He, too, departs — 
Who with him ? — even the senseless Little-one. 
With that sole charge he passed the city-gates, 
For the last time, attendant by the side 
Of a close chair, a litter, or sedan, 
In which the Babe was carried. To a hill, 
That rose a brief league distant from the town, 
The dwellers in that house where he had lodged 
Accompanied his steps, by anxious love 
Impelled ; — they parted from him there, and stood 
Watching below till he had disappeared 
On the hill top. His eyes he scarcely took, 
Throughout that journey, from the vehicle 
(Slow-moving ark of all Ms hopes !) that veiled 
The tender infant : and at every inn, 
And under every hospitable tree 
At which the bearers halted or reposed, 
Laid Mm with timid care upon his knees, 
And looked, as mothers ne'er were known to look, 
Upon the nursling which Ms arms embraced. 
This was the manner in wMch Vaudracour 
Departed with his infant ; and thus reached 
His father's house, where to the innocent child 
Admittance was denied. The young man spake 
No word of mdignation or reproof, 
But of Ms father begged, a last request, 
That a retreat might be assigned to him 

THE IDIOT BOY. 

 

Where in forgotten quiet he might dwell, 
With such allowance as his wants required ; 
For wishes he had none. To a lodge that stood 
Deep in a forest, with leave given, at the age 
Of four-and-twenty summers he withdrew ; 
And thither took with him his motherless Babe, 
And one domestic for their common needs, 
An aged woman. It consoled him here 
To attend upon the orphan, and perform 
Obsequious service to the precious child, 
Which, after a short time, by some mistake 
Or indiscretion of the Father, died. — 
The Tale I follow to its last recess 
Of suffering or of peace, I know not which : 
Theirs be the blame who caused the woe, not mine ! 
From this time forth he never shared a smile 
With mortal creature. An Inhabitant 
Of that same town, in which the pair had left 
So lively a remembrance of their griefs, 
By chance of business, coming within reach 
Of his retirement, to the forest lodge 
Repaired, but only found the matron there, 
Who told lhhi that his pains were thrown away, 
For that her Master never uttered word 
To living thing — not even to her. — Behold ! 
While they were speaking, Vaudracour approached; 
But, seeing some one near, as on the latch 
Of the garden-gate his hand was laid, he shrunk — 
And, like a shadow, glided out of view. 
Shocked at his savage aspect, from the place 
The visitor retired. 
Thus lived the Youth 
Cut off from all intelligence with man, 
And shunning even the light of common day ; 
Nor could the voice of Freedom, which through 
France 
Full speedily resounded, public hope, 
Or personal memory of his own deep wrongs, 
Rouse him : but in those solitary shades 
His days he wasted, an imbecile mind ! 
. 

XXXI. 
THE IDIOT BOY. 

'Tis eight o'clock,— a clear March night, 
The moon is up, — the sky is blue, 
The owlet, in the moonlight air, 
Shouts from nobody knows where ; 
He lengthens out his lonely shout, 
Halloo ! halloo ! a long halloo ! 

— Why bustle thus about your door, 
What means this bustle, Betty Foy ? 
Why are you in this mighty fret ! 
And why on horseback have you set 
Him whom you love, your Idiot Boy \ 
Scarcely a soul is out of bed ; 
Good Betty, put him down again ; 
His lips with joy they burr at you ; 
But, Betty ! what has he to do 
With stirrup, saddle, or with rein  
But Betty 's bent on her intent ; 
For her good neighbour, Susan Gale, 
Old Susan, she who dwells alone, 
Is sick, and makes a piteous moan, 
As if her very life would fail. 
There 's not a house within a mile, 
No hand to help them in distress ; 
Old Susan lies a-bed in pain, 
And sorely puzzled are the twain, 
For what she ails they cannot guess. 
And Betty's husband 's at the wood, 
Where by the week he doth abide, 
A woodman in the distant vale ; 
There 's none to help poor Susan Gale ; 
What must be done \ what will betide % 
And Betty from the lane has fetched 
Her Pony, that is mild and good j 
Whether he be in joy or pain, 
Feeding at will along the lane, 
Or bringing faggots from the wood. 
And he is all in travelling trim, — 
And, by the moonlight, Betty Foy 
Has on the well-girt saddle set 
(The like was never heard of yet) 
Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy. 
And he must post without delay 
Across the bridge and through the dale, 
And by the church, and o'er the down, 
To bring a Doctor from the town, 
Or she will die, old Susan Gale. 
There is no need of boot or spur, 
There is no need of whip or wand ; 
For Johnny has his holly-bough, 
And with a hurly-burly now 
He shakes the green bough in his hand. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

And Betty o'er and o'er has told 
The Boy, who is her best delight, 
Both what to follow, what to shun, 
What do, and what to leave undone, 
How turn to left, and how to right. 
And Betty's most especial charge, 
Was, " Johnny ! Johnny ! mind that you 
Come home again, nor stop at all, — 
Come home again, whate'er befal, 
My Johnny, do, I pray you do." 
To this did Johnny answer make, 
Both with his head and with his hand, 
And proudly shook the bridle too ; 
And then ! his words were not a few, 
Which Betty well could understand. 
And now that Johnny is just going, 
Though Betty 's in a mighty flurry, 
She gently pats the Pony's side, 
On which her Idiot Boy must ride, 
And seems no longer in a hurry. 
But when the Pony moved his legs, 
Oh ! then for the poor Idiot Boy ! 
For joy he cannot hold the bridle, 
For joy his head and heels are idle, 
He 's idle all for very joy. 
And while the Pony moves his legs, 
In Johnny's left hand you may see 
The green bough motionless and dead : 
The Moon that shines above bis head 
Is not more still and mute than he. 
His heart it was so full of glee, 
That till full fifty yards were gone, 
He quite forgot his holly whip, 
And all his skill in horsemanship : 
Oh ! happy, happy, happy John. 
And while the Mother, at the door, 
Stands fixed, her face with joy o'erflows, 
Proud of herself, and proud of him, 
She sees him in his travelling trim, 
How quietly her Johnny goes. 
The silence of her Idiot Boy, 
What hopes it sends to Betty 's heart ! 
He 's at the guide-post — he turns right ; 
She watches till he 's out of sight, 
And Betty will not then depart. 

Burr, burr — now Johnny's lips they burr, 
As loud as any mill, or near it ; 
Meek as a lamb the Pony moves, 
And Johnny makes the noise he loves, 
And Betty listens, glad to hear it. 
Away she hies to Susan Gale : 
Her Messenger 's in merry tune ; 
The owlets hoot, the owlets curr, 
And Johnny's lips they burr, burr, burr, 
As on he goes beneath the moon. 
His steed and he right well agree ; 
For of this Pony there 's a rumour, 
That, should he lose his eyes and ears, 
And should he live a thousand years, 
He never will be out of humour. 
But then he is a horse that thinks ! 
And when he thinks, his pace is slack ; 
Now, though he knows poor Johnny well, 
Yet, for his life, he cannot tell 
What he has got upon his back. 
So through the moonlight lanes they go, 
And far into the moonlight dale, 
And by the church, and o'er the down, 
To bring a Doctor from the town, 
To comfort poor old Susan Gale. 
And Betty, now at Susan's side, 
Is in the middle of her story, 
What speedy help her Boy will bring, 
With many a most diverting thing, 
Of Johnny's wit, and Johnny's glory. 
And Betty, still at Susan's side, 
By this time is not quite so flurried : 
Demure with porringer and plate 
She sits, as if in Susan's fate 
Her life and soul were buried. 
But Betty, poor good woman ! she, 
You plainly in her face may read it, 
Could lend out of that moment's store 
Five years of happiness or more 
To any that might need it. 
But yet I guess that now and then 
With Betty all was not so well ; 
And to the road she turns her ears, 
And thence full many a sound she hears, 
Which she to Susan will not tell. 

THE IDIOT BOY. 

 

Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans ; 
" As sure as there 's a moon in heaven," 
Cries Betty, " he ' be back again ; 
They ' both be here — 'tis almost ten — 
Both will be here before eleven." 
Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans ; 
The clock gives warning for eleven ; 
'Tis on the stroke — " He must be near," 
Quoth Betty, " and will soon be here, 
As sure as there 's a moon in heaven." 
The clock is on the stroke of twelve, 
And Johnny is not yet in sight : 
— The Moon 's in heaven, as Betty sees, 
But Betty is not quite at ease ; 
And Susan has a dreadful night. 
And Betty, half an hour ago, 
On Johnny vile reflections cast : 
" A little idle sauntering Thing !" 
With other names, an endless string ; 
But now that time is gone and past. 
And Betty 's drooping at the heart, 
That happy time all past and gone, 
" How can it be he is so late ? 
The Doctor, he has made him wait ; 
Susan ! they ' both be here anon." 
And Susan 's growing worse and worse, 
And Betty 's in a sad quandary; 
And then there 's nobody to say 
If she must go, or she must stay ! 
— She 's in a sad quandary. 
The clock is on the stroke of one ; 
But neither Doctor nor his Guide 
Appears along the moonlight road ; 
There 's neither horse nor man abroad, 
And Betty 's still at Susan's side. 
And Susan now begins to fear 
Of sad mischances not a few, 
That Johnny may perhaps be drowned ; 
Or lost, perhaps, and never found ; 
Which they must both for ever rue. 
She prefaced half a hint of this 
With, " God forbid it should be true !" 
At the first word that Susan said 
Cried Betty, rising from the bed, 
" Susan, I 'd gladly stay with you. 

I must be gone, I must away : 
Consider, Johnny 's but half-wise ; it 
Susan, we must take care of him, 
If he is hurt in life or limb " — 
" Oh God forbid ! " poor Susan cries. 
" What can I do \ " says Betty, going, 
" What can I do to ease your pain ? 
Good Susan tell me, and I ' stay ; 
I fear you 're in a dreadful way, 
But I shall soon be back again." 
" Nay, Betty, go ! good Betty, go ! 
There's nothing that can ease my pain." 
Then off she hies ; but with a prayer 
That God poor Susan's life would spare, 
Till she comes back again. 
So, through the moonlight lane she goes, 
And far into the moonlight dale ; 
And how she ran, and how she walked, 
And all that to herself she tallied, 
Would surely be a tedious tale. 
In high and low, above, below, 
In great and small, in round and square, 
In tree and tower was Johnny seen, 
In bush and brake, in black and green ; 
'Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where. 
And while she crossed the bridge, there came 
A thought with which her heart is sore — 
Johnny perhaps his horse forsook, 
To hunt the moon within the brook, 
And never will be heard of more. 
Now is she high upon the down, 
Alone amid a prospect wide ; 
There 's neither Johnny nor his Horse 
Among the fern or hi the gorse ; 
There 's neither Doctor nor his Guide. 
" Oh saints ! what is become of him ? 
Perhaps he 's climbed into an oak, 
Where he will stay till he is dead ; 
Or, sadly he has been misled, 
And joined the wandering gipsy-folk. 
Or him that wicked Pony 's carried 
To the dark cave, the goblin's hall ; 
Or in the castle he's pursuing 
Among the ghosts his own undoing ; 
Or playing with the waterfall." 

f )l 

POEMS POUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS, 

At poor old Susan then she railed, 
■While to the town she posts away ; 
" If Susan had not been so ill, 
Alas ! I should have had him still, 
My Johnny, till my dying day." 

And now she 's high upon the down, 
And she can see a mile of road : 
" cruel ! I 'm almost threescore ; 
Such night as this was ne'er before, 
There 's not a single soul abroad." 

Poor Betty, in this sad distemper, 
The Doctor's self could hardly spare : 
Unworthy things she talked, and wild ; 
Even he, of cattle the most mild, 
The Pony had his share. 

She listens, but she cannot hear 
The foot of horse, the voice of man ; 
The streams with softest sound are flowing, 
The grass you almost hear it growing, 
You hear it now, if e'er you can. 

But now she 's fairly in the town, 
And to the Doctor's door she hies ; 
'Tis silence all on every side ; 
The town so long, the town so wide, 
Is silent as the skies. 

The owlets through the long blue night 
Are shouting to each other still : 
Fond lovers ! yet not quite hob nob, 
They lengthen out the tremulous sob, 
That echoes far from hill to hill. 

And now she 's at the Doctor's door, 
She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap ; 
The Doctor at the casement shows 
His glimmering eyes that peep and doze ! 
And one hand rubs his old night-cap. 

Poor Betty now has lost all hope, 
Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin, 
A green-grown pond she just has past, 
And from the brink she hurries fast, 
Lest she should drown herself therein. 

K Oh Doctor ! Doctor ! where 's my Johnny ?" 
" I 'm here, what is 't you want with me V 
" Oh Sir ! you know I 'm Betty Foy, 
And I have lost my poor dear Boy, 
You know him — him you often see ; 

And now she sits her down and weeps ; 
Such tears she never shed before ; 
" Oh dear, dear Pony ! my sweet joy ! 
Oh carry back my Idiot Boy ! 
And we will ne'er o'erload thee more." 

He 's not so wise as some folks be :" 
" The devil take his wisdom !" said 
The Doctor, looking somewhat grim, 
" What, Woman ! should I know of him ? " 
And, grumbling, he went back to bed ! 

A thought is come into her head : 
The Pony he is mild and good, 
And we have always used him well ; 
Perhaps he 's gone along the dell, 
And carried Johnny to the wood. 

" woe is me ! woe is me ! 
Here will I die ; here will I die ; 
I thought to find my lost one here, 
But he is neither far nor near, 
Oh ! what a wretched Mother I !" 

Then up she springs as if on wings ; 
She thinks no more of deadly sin ; 
If Betty fifty ponds should see, 
The last of all her thoughts would be 
To drown herself therein. 

She stops, she stands, she looks about; 
Which way to turn she cannot tell. 
Poor Betty ! it would ease her pain 
If she had heart to knock again ; 
— The clock strikes three — a dismal knell ! 

Pleader ! now that I might tell 
What Johnny and his Horse are doing ! 
What they 've been doing all this time, 
Oh could I put it into rhyme, 
A most delightful tale pursuing ! 

Then up along the town she hies, 
No wonder if her senses fail ; 
This piteous news so much it shocked her, 
She quite forgot to send the Doctor, 
To comfort poor old Susan Gale. 

Perhaps, and no unlikely thought ! 
He with his Pony now doth roam 
The cliffs and peaks so high that are, 
To lay his hands upon a star, 
And in his pocket bring it home. 

THE IDIOT BOY. 

 

Perhaps he 's turned himself about, 
His face unto his horse's tail, 
And, still and mute, in wonder lost, 
All silent as a horseman-ghost, 
He travels slowly down the vale. 
And now, perhaps, is hunting sheep, 
A fierce and dreadful hunter he ; 
Yon valley, now so trim and green, 
In five months' time, should he be seen, 
A desert wilderness will be ! 
Perhaps, with head and heels on fire, 
And like the very sold of evil, 
He 's galloping away, away, 
And so will gallop on for aye, 
The bane of all that dread the devil ! 
I to the Muses have been bound 
These fourteen years, by strong indentures : 
gentle Muses ! let me tell 
But half of what to him befel ; 
He surely met with strange adventures. 
gentle Muses ! is this kind ? 
Why will ye thus my suit repel ? 
Why of your further aid bereave me ? 
And can ye thus unfriended leave me ; 
Ye Muses ! whom I love so well ? 
Who 's yon, that, near the waterfall, 
Which thunders down with headlong force, 
Beneath the moon, yet shining fair, 
As careless as if nothing were, 
Sits upright on a feeding horse ? 
Unto his horse— there feeding free, 
He seems, I think, the rein to give ; 
Of moon or stars he takes no heed ; 
Of such we in romances read : 
— 'Tis Johnny ! Johnny ! as I live. 
And that's the very Pony, too ! 
Where is she, where is Betty Foy ? 
She hardly can sustain her fears ; 
The roaring waterfall she hears. 
And cannot find her Idiot Boy. 
Your Pony 's worth his weight in gold : 
Then calm your terrors, Betty Foy ! 
She 's coming from among the trees, 
And now all full in view she sees 
Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy. 

And Betty sees the Pony too : 
Why stand you thus, good Betty Foy  
It is no goblin, 'tis no ghost, 
'Tis he whom you so long have lost, 
He whom you love, your Idiot Boy. 
She looks again — her arms are up — 
She screams — she camiot move for joy ; 
She darts, as with a torrent's force, 
She almost has o'erturned the Horse, 
And fast she holds her Idiot Boy. 
And Johnny burrs, and laughs aloud ; 
Whether in cunning or in joy 
I cannot tell ; but while he laughs, 
Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs 
To hear again her Idiot Boy. 
And now she 's at the Pony's tail, 
And now is at the Pony's head, — 
On that side now, and now on this ; 
And, almost stifled with her bliss, 
A few sad tears does Betty shed. 
She kisses o'er and o'er again 
Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy ; 
She 's happy here, is happy there, 
She is uneasy every where ; 
Her limbs are all alive with joy. 
She pats the Pony, where or when 
She knows not, happy Betty Foy ! 
The little Pony glad may be, 
But he is milder far than she, 
You hardly can perceive his joy. 
" Oh ! Johnny, never mind the Doctor ; 
You 've done your best, and that is all : " 
She took the reins, when this was said, 
And gently turned the Pony's head 
From the loud waterfall. 
By this the stars were almost gone, 
The moon was setting on the hill, 
So pale you scarcely looked at her : 
The little birds began to stir, 
Though yet their tongues were still. 
The Pony, Betty, and her Boy, 
Wind slowly through the woody dale ; 
And who is she, betimes abroad, 
That hobbles up the steep rough road ? 
Who is it, but old Susan Gale ? 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Long time lay Susan lost in thought; 
And many dreadful fears beset her, 
Both for her Messenger and Nurse ; 
And, as her mind grew worse and worse, 
Her body — it grew better. 
She turned, she tossed herself in bed, 
On all sides doubts and terrors met her ; 
Point after point did she discuss ; 
And, while her mind was fighting thus, 
Her body still grew better. 
"Alas ! what is become of them ? 
These fears can never be endured ; 
I ' to the wood." — The word scarce said, 
Did Susan rise up from her bed, 
As if by magic cured. 
Away she goes up hill and down, 
And to the wood at length is come ; 
She spies her Friends, she shouts a greeting ; 
Oh me ! it is a merry meeting 
As ever was in Christendom. 
The owls have hardly sung their last, 
While our four travellers homeward wend ; 
The owls have hooted all night long, 
And with the owls began my song, 
And with the owls must end. 
For while they all were travelling home, 
Cried Betty, "Tell us, Johnny, do, 
Where all this long night you have been, 
What you have heard, what you have seen : 
And, Johnny, mind you tell us true." 
Now Johnny all night long had heard 
The owls in tuneful concert strive ; 
No doubt too he the moon had seen ; 
For in the moonlight he had been 
From eight o'clock till five. 
And thus, to Betty's question, he 
Made answer, like a traveller bold, 
(His very words I give to you,) 
" The cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo, 
And the sun did shine so cold ! " 
— Thus answered Johnny in his glory, 
And that was all his travel's story. 

MICHAEL. 


A PASTORAL POEiU. 

If from the public way you turn your steps 
Up the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll, 
You will suppose that with an upright path 
Your feet must struggle ; in such bold ascent 
The pastoral mountains front you, face to face. 
But, courage ! for around that boisterous brool 
The mountains have all opened out themselves. 
And made a hidden valley of their own. 
No habitation can be seen ; but they 
Who journey thither find themselves alone 
With a few sheep, with rocks and stones, and kite 
That overhead are sailing in the sky. 
It is in truth an utter solitude ; 
Nor should I have made mention of this Dell 
But for one object which you might pass by, 
Might see and notice not. Beside the brook 
Appears a straggling heap of unhewn stones ! 
And to that simple object appertains ■ 
A story — unenriched with strange events, 
Yet not unfit, I deem, for the fireside, 
Or for the summer shade. It was the first 
Of those domestic tales that spake to me 
Of Shepherds, dwellers in the valleys, men 
Whom I already loved ; — not verily 
For their own sakes, but for the fields and hills 
Where was their occupation and abode. 
And hence this Tale, while I was yet a Boy 
Careless of books, yet having felt the power 
Of Nature, by the gentle agency 
Of natural objects, led me on to feel 
For passions that were not my own, and think 
(At random and imperfectly indeed) 
On man, the heart of man, and human life. 
Therefore, although it be a history 
Homely and rude, I will relate the same 
For the delight of a few natural hearts ; 
And, with yet fonder feeling, for the sake 
Of youthful Poets, who among these hills 
Will be my second self when I am gone. 
Upon the forest-side in Grasmere Vale 
There dwelt a Shepherd, Michael was his name ; 
An old man, stout of heart, and strong of limb. 
His bodily frame had been from youth to age 
Of an unusual strength : his mind was keen, 
Intense, and frugal, apt for all affairs, 
And in his shepherd's calling he was prompt 
And watchful more than ordinary men. 

MICHAEL. 

 

Hence had he learned the meaning of all winds, 
Of blasts of every tone ; and, oftentimes, 
When others heeded not, He heard the South 
Make subterraneous music, like the noise 
Of bagpipers on distant Highland hills. 
The Shepherd, at such warning, of his flock 
Bethought him, and he to himself would say, 
' The winds are now devising work for me ! ' 
And, truly, at all times, the storm, that drives 
The traveller to a shelter, summoned him 
Up to the mountains : he had been alone 
Amid the heart of many thousand mists, 
That came to him, and left him, on the heights. 
So lived he till his eightieth year was past. 
And grossly that man errs, who should suppose 
That the green valleys, and the streams and rocks, 
Were things indifferent to the Shepherd's thoughts. 
Fields, where with cheerful spirits he had breathed 
The common air ; hills, which with vigorous step 
He had so often climbed ; which had impressed 
So many incidents upon his mind 
Of hardship, skill or courage, joy or fear ; 
Which, like a book, preserved the memory 
Of the dumb animals, whom he had saved, 
Had fed or sheltered, linking to such acts 
The certainty of honourable gain ; 
Those fields, those hills — what could they less ? 
had laid 
Strong hold on his affections, were to him 
A pleasurable feeling of blind love, 
The pleasure which there is in life itself. 
His days had not been passed in singleness. 
His Helpmate was a comely matron, old — 
Though younger than himself full twenty years. 
She was a woman of a stirring life, 
Whose heart was in her house : two wheels she had 
Of antique form ; this large, for spinning wool ; 
That small, for flax ; and if one wheel had rest 
It was because the other was at work. 
The Pair had but one inmate in their house, 
An only Child, who had been born to them 
When Michael, telling o'er his years, began 
To deem that he was old, — in shepherd's phrase, 
With one foot in the grave. This only Son, 
With two brave sheep-dogs tried in many a storm, 
The one of an inestimable worth, 
Made all their household. I may truly say, 
That they were as a proverb in the vale 
For endless industry. When day was gone, 
And from their occupations out of doors 
The Son and Father were come home, even then, 
Their labour did not cease ; unless when all 
Turned to the cleanly supper-board, and there, 

Each with a mess of pottage and skimmed milk, 
Sat round the basket piled with oaten cakes, 
And their plain home-made cheese. Yet when 
the meal 
Was ended, Luke (for so the Son was named) 
And his old Father both betook themselves 
To such convenient work as might employ 
Their hands by the fire-side ; perhaps to card 
Wool for the Housewife's spindle, or repair 
Some injury done to sickle, flail, or scythe, 
Or other implement of house or field. 
Down from the ceiling, by the chimney's edge, 
That in our ancient uncouth country style 
With huge and black projection overbrowed 
Large space beneath, as duly as the light 
Of day grew dim the Housewife hung a lamp ; 
An aged utensil, which had performed 
Service beyond all others of its kind. 
Early at evening did it burn — and late, 
Surviving comrade of uncounted hours, 
Which, going by from year to year, had found, 
And left the couple neither gay perhaps 
Nor cheerful, yet with objects and with hopes, 
Living a life of eager industry. 
And now, when Luke had reached his eighteenth 
year, 
There by the light of this old lamp they sate, 
Father and Son, while far into the night 
The Housewife plied her own peculiar work, 
Making the cottage through the silent hours 
Murmur as with the sound of summer flies. 
This light was famous in its neighbourhood, 
And was a public symbol of the life 
That thrifty Pair had lived. For, as it chanced, 
Their cottage on a plot of rising ground 
Stood single, with large prospect, north and south, 
High into Easedale, up to Dunmail-Raise, 
And westward to the village near the lake ; 
And from this constant fight, so regular 
And so far seen, the House itself, by all 
Who dwelt within the limits of the vale, 
Both old and young, was named TheEvening Staji, 
Thus living on through such a length of years, 
The Shepherd, if he loved himself, must needs 
Have loved Ins Helpmate ; but to Michael's heart 
This son of his old age was yet more dear — 
Less from instinctive tenderness, the same 
Fond spirit that blindly works in the blood of all — 
Than that a child, more than all other gifts 
That earth can offer to declining man, 
Brings hope with it, and forward-looking thoughts, 
And stirrings of inquietude, when they 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

 

By tendency of nature needs must fail. 
Exceeding was the love he bare to him, 
His heart and his heart's joy ! For oftentimes 
Old Michael, while he was a babe in arms, 
Had done him female service, not alone 
For pastime and delight, as is the use 
Of fathers, but with patient mind enforced 
To acts of tenderness ; and he had rocked 
His cradle, as with a woman's gentle hand. 
And, in a later time, ere yet the Bo/ 
Had put on boy's attire, did Michael love, 
Albeit of a stern unbending mind, 
To have the Young-one in his sight, when he 
Wrought in the field, or on his shepherd's stool 
Sate with a fettered sheep before him stretched 
Under the large old oak, that near his door 
Stood single, and, from matchless depth of shade, 
Chosen for the Shearer's covert from the sun, 
Thence in our rustic dialect was called 
The Clipping Tree , a name which yet it bears. 
There, while they two were sitting in the shade, 
With others round them, earnest all and blithe, 
Would Michael exercise his heart with looks 
Of fond correction and reproof bestowed 
Upon the Child, if he disturbed the sheep 
By catching at their legs, or with his shouts 
Scared them, while they lay still beneath the shears. 
And when by Heaven'sgood grace theboy grew up 
A healthy Lad, and carried in his cheek 
Two steady roses that were five years old ; 
Then Michael from a winter coppice cut 
With his own hand a sapling, which he hooped 
With iron, making it throughout in all 
Due requisites a perfect shepherd's staff, 
And gave it to the Boy ; wherewith equipt 
He as a watchman oftentimes was placed 
At gate or gap, to stem or turn the flock ; 
And, to his office prematurely called, 
There stood the urchin, as you will divine, 
Something between a hindrance and a help ; 
And for this cause not always, I believe, 
Receiving from his Father hire of praise ; 
Though nought was left undone which staff, or 
voice, 
Or looks, or threatening gestures, could perform. 
But soon as Luke, full ten years old, could stand 
Against the mountain blasts ; and to the heights, 
Not fearing toil, nor length of weary ways, 

 Clipping is the word used in the North of England for 
shearing. 

He with his Father daily went, and they 
Were as companions, why should I relate 
That objects which the Shepherd loved before 
Were dearer now  that from the Boy there came 
Feelings and emanations — things which were 
Light to the sun and music to the wind; 
And that the old Man's heart seemed born again ? 
Thus in his Father's sight the Boy grew up : 
And now, when he had reached his eighteenth year, 
He was his comfort and his daily hope. 
While in this sort the simple household lived 
From day to day, to Michael's ear there came 
Distressful tidmgs. Long before the time 
Of which I speak, the Shepherd had been bound 
In surety for his brother's son, a man 
Of an industrious life, and ample means ; 
But unforeseen misfortunes suddenly 
Had prest upon him ; and old Michael now 
Was summoned to discharge the forfeiture, 
A grievous penalty, but httle less 
Than half his substance. This unlooked-for claim, 
At the first hearing, for a moment took 
More hope out of his life than he supposed 
That any old man ever could have lost. 
As soon as he had armed himself with strength 
To look his trouble in the face, it seemed 
The Shepherd's sole resource to sell at once 
A portion of his patrimonial fields. 
Such was his first resolve ; he thought again, 
And Ms heart failed him. " Isabel," said he, 
Two evenings after he had heard the news, 
" I have been toiling more than seventy years, 
And in the open sunshine of God's love 
Have we all lived ; yet if these fields of ours 
Should pass into a stranger's hand, I think 
That I could not lie quiet in my grave. 
Our lot is a hard lot ; the sun himself 
Has scarcely been more diligent than I ; 
And I have lived to be a fool at last 
To my own family. An evil man 
That was, and made an evil choice, if he 
Were false to us ; and if he were not false, 
There are ten thousand to whom loss like this 
Had been no sorrow. I forgive him ; — but 
'Twere better to be dumb than to talk thus. 
When I began, my purpose was to speak 
Of remedies and of a cheerful hope. 
Our Luke shall leave us, Isabel ; the land 
Shall not go from us, and it shall be free ; 
He shall possess it, free as is the wind 
That passes over it. We have, thou know'st, 

MICHAEL. 

.') 

Another kinsman — he will be our friend 
In this distress. He is a prosperous man, 
Thriving in trade — and Luke to him shall go, 
And with his kinsman's help and his own thrift 
He quickly will repair this loss, and then 
He may return to us. If here he stay, 
What can be done  Where every one is poor, 
What can be gained ? " 
At this the old Man paused, 
And Isabel sat silent, for her mind 
Was busy, looking back into past times. 
There 's Richard Bateman, thought she to herself, 
He was a parish-boy — at the church-door 
They made a gathering for him, shillings, pence 
And halfpennies, wherewith the neighbours bought 
A basket, which they filled with pedlar's wares ; 
And, with this basket on his arm, the lad 
Went up to London, found a master there, 
Who, out of many, chose the trusty boy 
To go and overlook his merchandise 
Beyond the seas ; where he grew wondrous rich, 
And left estates and monies to the poor  , 
And, at his birth-place, built a chapel floored 
With marble, which he sent from foreign lands. 
These thoughts, and many others of like sort, 
Passed quickly through the mind of Isabel, 
And her face brightened. The old Man was glad, 
And thus resumed : — Well, Isabel ! this scheme 
These two days, has been meat and drink to me. 
Far more than we have lost is left us yet. 
■ — We have enough— I wish indeed that I 
Were younger ;— but this hope is a good hope. 
— Make ready Luke's best garments, of the best 
Buy for him more, and let us send him forth 
To-morrow, or the next day, or to-night : 
—If he could go, the Boy should go to-night." 
Here Michael ceased, and to the fields went forth 
With a light heart. The Housewife for five days 
Was restless morn and night, and all day long 
Wrought on with her best fingers to prepare 
Things needful for the journey of her son. 
But Isabel was glad when Sunday came 
To stop her in her work : for, when she lay 
By Michael's side, she through the last two nights 
Heard him, how he was troubled in his sleep : 
And when they rose at morning she could see 
That all his hopes were gone. That day at noon 
She said to Luke, while they two by themselves 
Were sitting at the door, " Thou must not go : 
We have no other Child but thee to lose, 
None to remember — do not go away, 
For if thou leave thy Father he will die." 
The Youth made answer with a jocund voice ; 

And Isabel, when she had told her fears, 
Recovered heart. That evening her best fare 
Did she bring forth, and all together sat 
Like happy people round a Christmas fire. 
With daylight Isabel resumed her work ; 
And all the ensuing week the house appeared 
As cheerful as a grove in Spring : at length 
The expected letter from their kinsman came, 
With kind assurances that he would do 
His utmost for the welfare of the Boy ; 
To which, requests were added, that forthwith 
He might be sent to him. Ten times or more 
The letter was read over ; Isabel 
Went forth to show it to the neighbours round ; 
Nor was there at that time on English land 
A prouder heart than Luke's. When Isabel 
Had to her house returned, the old Man said, 
" He shall depart to-morrow." To this word 
The Housewife answered, talking much of things 
Which, if at such short notice he should go, 
Would surely be forgotten. But at length 
She gave consent, and Michael was at ease. 
Near the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll, 
In that deep vaUey, Michael had designed 
To build a Sheep-fold ; and, before he heard 
The tidings of his melancholy loss, 
For this same purpose he had gathered up 
A heap of stones, which by the streamlet's edge 
Lay thrown together, ready for the work. 
With Luke that evening thitherward he walked : 
And soon as they had reached the place he stopped, 
And thus the old Man spake to him : — " My Son, 
To-morrow thou wilt leave me : with full heart. 
I look upon thee, for thou art the same 
That wert a promise to me ere thy birth, 
And all thy life hast been my daily joy. 
I will relate to thee some little part 
Of our two histories ; 'twill do thee good 
When thou art from me, even if I should touch 
On things thou canst not know of. After thou 
First cam'st into the world — as oft befals 
To new-born infants — thou didst sleep away 
Two days, and blessings from thy Father's tongue 
Then fell upon thee. Day by day passed on, 
And still I loved thee with increasing love. 
Never to living ear came sweeter sounds 
Than when I heard thee by our own fire-side 
First uttering, without words, a natural tune ; 
While thou, a feeding babe, didst hi thy joy 
Sing at thy Mother's breast. Month followed month, 
And in the open fields my life was passed 
And on the mountains ; else I think that thou 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Hadst been brought up upon thy Father's knees. 
But we were playmates, Luke : among these hills, 
As well thou knowest, in us the old and young 
Have played together, nor with me didst thou 
Lack any pleasure which a boy can know." 
Luke had a manly heart ; but at these words 
He sobbed aloud. The old Man grasped his hand, 
And said, " Nay, do not take it so — I see 
That these are things of which I need not speak. 
— Even to the utmost I have been to thee 
A kind and a good Father : and herein 
I but repay a gift which I myself 
Received at others' hands ; for, though now old 
Beyond the common life of man, I still 
Remember them who loved me in my youth. 
Both of them sleep together : here they lived, 
As all their Forefathers had done ; and when 
At length their time was come, they were not loth 
To give their bodies to the family mould. 
I wished that thou shouldst live the life they lived : 
But, 'tis a long time to look back, my Son, 
And see so little gain from threescore years. 
These fields were burthened when they came to me ; 
Till I was forty years of age, not more 
Than half of my inheritance was mine. 
I toiled and toiled ; God blessed me in my work, 
And till these three weeks past the land was free. 
— It looks as if it never could endure 
Another Master. Heaven forgive me, Luke, 
If I judge ill for thee, but it seems good 
That thou should'st go." 
At this the old Man paused ; 
Then, pointing to the stones near which they stood, 
Thus, after a short silence, he resumed : 
" This was a work for us ; and now, my Son, 
It is a work for me. But, lay one stone — 
Here, lay it for me, Luke, with thine own hands. 
Nay, Boy, be of good hope ; — we both may live 
To see a better ay. At eighty-four 
I still am strong and hale ; — do thou thy part ; 
I will do mine. — I will begin again 
With many tasks that were resigned to thee : 
Up to the heights, and in among the storms, 
Will I without thee go again, and do 
All works which I was wont to do alone, 
Before I knew thy face. — Heaven bless thee, Boy ! 
Thy heart these two weeks has been beating fast 
With many hopes ; it should be so — yes — yes — 
I knew that tbou could'st never have a wish 
To leave me, Luke : thou hast been bound to me 
Only by links of love : when thou art gone, 
What will be left to us !— But, I forget 
My purposes. Lay now the corner-stone, 
As I requested ; and hereafter, Luke, 

When thou art gone away, should evil men 
Be thy companions, think of me, my Son, 
And of this moment ; hither turn thy thoughts, 
And God will strengthen thee : amid all fear 
And all temptation, Luke, I pray that thou 
May'st bear in mind the life thy Fathers lived, 
Who, being innocent, did for that cause 
Bestir them in good deeds. Now, fare thee well — 
When thou return'st, thou in this place wilt see 
A work which is not here : a covenant 
'Twill be between us ; but, whatever fate 
Befal thee, I shall love thee to the last, 
And bear thy memory with me to the grave." 
The Shepherd ended here ; and Luke stooped 
down, 
And, as his Father had requested, laid 
The first stone of the Sheep-fold. At the sight 
The old Man's grief broke from him ; to his heart 
He pressed his Son, he kissed him and wept ; 
And to the house together they returned. 
— Hushed was that House in peace, or seeming 
peace, 
Ere the night fell : — with morrow's dawn the Boy 
Began his journey, and when he had reached 
The public way, he put on a bold face ; 
And all the neighbours, as he passed their doors, 
Came forth with wishes and with farewell prayers, 
That followed him till he was out of sight. 
A good report did from their Kinsman come, 
Of Luke and his well-doing : and the Boy 
Wrote loving letters, full of wondrous news, 
Which, as the Housewife phrased it, were throughout 
' The prettiest letters that were ever seen.' 
Both parents read them with rejoicing hearts. 
So, many months passed on : and once again 
The Shepherd went about his daily work 
With confident and cheerful thoughts ; and now 
Sometimes when he could find a leisure hour 
He to that valley took his way, and there 
Wrought at the Sheep-fold. Meantime Luke began 
To slacken in his duty ; and, at length, 
He in the dissolute city gave himself 
To evil courses : ignominy and shame 
Fell on him, so that he was driven at last 
To seek a hiding-place beyond the seas. 
There is a comfort in the strength of love ; 
'Twill make a thing endurable, which else 
Would overset the brain, or break the heart : 
I have conversed with more than one who well 
Remember the old Man, and what he was 
Years after he had heard this heavy news. 

THE WIDOW ON V/INDERMERE SIDE. 

 ! 

His bodily frame had been from youth to age 
Of an unusual strength. Among the rocks 
He went, and still looked up to sun and cloud, 
And listened to the wind ; and, as before, 
Performed all kinds of labour for his sheep, 
And for the land, his small inheritance. 
And to that hollow dell from time to time 
Did he repair, to build the Fold of which 
His flock had need. 'Tis not forgotten yet 
The pity which was then in every heart 
For the old Man — and 'tis believed by all 
That many and many a day he thither went, 
And never lifted up a single stone. 
There, by the Sheep-fold, sometimes was he 
seen 
Sitting alone, or with his faithful Dog, 
Then old, beside him, lying at his feet. 
The length of full seven years, from time to time, 
He at the building of this Sheep-fold wrought, 
And left the work unfinished when he died. 
Three years, or little more, did Isabel 
Survive her Husband : at her death the estate 
Was sold, and went into a stranger's hand. 
The Cottage which was named the Evening Star 
Is gone — the ploughshare has been through the 
ground 
On which it stood ; great changes have been wrought 
In all the neighbourhood : — yet the oak is left 
That grew beside their door ; and the remains 
Of the unfinished Sheep-fold may be seen 
Beside the boisterous brook of Green-head Ghyll. 
. 

THE WIDOW ON WINDERMERE SIDE, 
r. 
How beautiful when up a lofty height 
Honour ascends among the humblest poor, 
And feeling sinks as deep ! See there the door 
Of One, a Widow, left beneath a weight 
Of blameless debt. On evil Fortune's spite 
She wasted no complaint, but strove to make 
A just repayment, both for conscience-sake 
| And that herself and hers should stand upright 
! In the world's eye. Her work when daylight failed 
| Paused not, and through the depth of night she kept 
| Such earnest vigils, that belief prevailed 
With some, the noble Creature never slept ; 
But, one by one, the hand of death assailed 
Her children from her inmost heart bewept, 

The Mother mourned, nor ceased her tears to flow, 
Till a winter's noon-day placed her buried Son 
Before her eyes, last child of many gone — 
His raiment of angelic white, and lo ! 
His very feet bright as the dazzling snow 
Which they are touching ; yea far brighter, even 
As that which comes, or seems to come, from heaven, 
Surpasses aught these elements can show. 
Much she rejoiced, trusting that from that hour 
Whate'er befel she could not grieve or pine ; 
But the Transfigured, in and out of season, 
Appeared, and spiritual presence gained a power 
Over material forms that mastered reason. 
OIi, gracious Heaven, in pity make her thine ! 
hi. 
But why that prayer  as if to her could come 
No good but by the way that leads to bliss 
Through Death, — so judging we should judge amiss. 
Since reason failed want is her threatened doom, 
Yet frequent transports mitigate the gloom : 
Nor of those maniacs is she one that kiss 
The air or laugh upon a precipice ; 
No, passing through strange sufferings toward the 
tomb 
She smiles as if a martyr's crown were won : 
Oft, when light breaks through clouds or waving 
trees, 
With outspread arms and fallen upon her knees 
The Mother hails in her descending Son 
An Angel, and in earthly ecstacies 
Her own angelic glory seems begun. 

THE ARMENIAN LADY'S LOVE. 
[The subject of the following poem is from the Orlandus 
of the author's friend, Kenelm Henry Digby: and the 
liberty is taken of inscribing it to him as an acknowledg- 
ment, however unworthy, of pleasure and instruction 
derived from his numerous and valuable writings, 
illustrative of the piety and chivalry of the olden time.] 

You have heard ' a Spanish Lady 
How she wooed an English man ;' 
Hear now of a fair Armenian, 
Daughter of the proud Soldan ; 
How she loved a Christian Slave, and told her pain 
By word, look, deed, with hope that he might love 
again. 

 See, in Percy's Reliqnes, that fine old ballad, "The 
Spanish Lady's Love;" from which Poem the form of 
stanza, as suitable to dialogue, is adopted. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

" Pluck that rose, it moves my liking," 
Said she, lifting up her veil ; 
" Pluck it for me, gentle gardener, 
Ere it wither and grow pale." 
" Princess fair, I till the ground, hut may not take 
From twig or hed an humbler flower, even for 
your sake !" 

•"< Grieved am I, submissive Christian ! 
To behold thy captive state ; 
Women, in your land, may pity 
(May they not?) the unfortunate." 
" Yes, kind Lady ! otherwise man could not bear 
Life, which to every one that breathes is full of 
care." 

" Worse than idle is compassion 
If it end in tears and sighs ; 
Thee from bondage would I rescue 
And from vile indignities ; 
Nurtured, as thy mien bespeaks, in high degree, 
Look up — and help a hand that longs to set thee 
free." 

" Lady ! dread the wish, nor venture 
In such peril to engage ; 
Think how it would stir against you 
Your most loving father's rage : 
Sad deliverance would it be, and yoked with shame, 
Should troubles overflow on her from whom it 

" Generous Frank ! the just in effort 
Are of inward peace secure : 
Hardships for the brave encountered, 
Even the feeblest may endure : 
If almighty grace through me thy chains unbind 
My father for slave's work may seek a slave in 
mind." 

" Princess, at this burst of goodness, 
My long-frozen heart grows warm ! " 
'•'■ Yet you make all courage fruitless, 
Me to save from chance of harm : 
Leading such companion I that gilded dome, 
Yon minarets, would gladly leave for his worst 
home." 

•'< Feeling tunes your voice, fair Princess ! 
And your brow is free from scorn, 
Else these words would come like mockery, 
Sharper than the pointed thorn." 
" Whence the undeserved mistrust ? Too wide apart 
Our faith hath been, — O would that eyes could see 
the heart ! " 

" Tempt me not, I pray ; my doom is 
These base implements to wield ; 
Rusty lance, I ne'er shall grasp thee, 
Ne'er assoil my cobwebb'd shield ! 
Never see my native land, nor castle towers, 
Nor Her who thinking of me there counts widowed 
hours." 

" Prisoner ! pardon youthful fancies ; 
Wedded ? If you can, say no ! 
Blessed is and be your consort ; 
Hopes I cherished — let them go ! 
Handmaid's privilege would leave my purpose free, 
Without another link to my felicity." 

" Wedded love with loyal Christians, 
Lady, is a mystery rare ; 
Body, heart, and soul in union, 
Make one being of a pair." 
u Humble love in me would look for no return, 
Soft as a guiding star that cheers, but cannot burn." 



" Gracious Allah ! by such title 
Do I dare to thank the God, 
Him who thus exalts thy spirit, 
Flower of an unchristian sod ! 
Or hast thou put off wings which thou in heaven 
dost wear ? 
What have I seen, and heard, or dreamt ? where 
am I ? where ? " 

Here broke off the dangerous converse : 
Less impassioned words might tell 
How the pair escaped together, 
Tears not wanting, nor a knell 
Of sorrow in her heart while through her father's 
door, 
And from her narrow world, she passed for ever- 
more. 

THE ARMENIAN LADY'S LOVE.  

XIV 
But affections higher, holier, 

XX. 
Make it known that my Companion 

Urged her steps ; she shrunk from trust 

Is of royal eastern blood, 

In a sensual creed that trampled 

Thirsting after all perfection, 

Woman's hirthright into dust. 

Innocent, and meek, and good, 

Little be the wonder then, the blame be none, 

Though with misbelievers bred; but that dark 

If she, a timid Maid, hath put such boldness on. 

night 


Will holy Church disperse by beams of gospel- 

XV. 

light." 

Judge both Fugitives with knowledge : 


In those old romantic days 

XXI. 

Mighty were the soul's commandments 

Swiftly went that grey-haired Servant, 

To support, restrain, or raise. 

Soon returned a trusty Page 

Foes might hang upon their path, snakes rustle 

Charged with greetings, benedictions, 

near, 

Thanks and praises, each a gage 

But nothing from their inward selves had they to 

For a sunny thought to cheer the Stranger's way, 

fear. 

Her virtuous scruples to remove, her fears allay. 

XVI. 
Thought infirm ne'er came between them, 

XXII. 

Whether printing desert sands 

And how blest the Reunited, 

With accordant steps, or gathering 

While beneath their castle-walls, 

Forest-fruit with social hands ; 

Runs a deafening noise of welcome ! — 

Or whispering like two reeds that in the cold moon- 

Blest, though every tear that falls 

beam 

Doth in its silence of past sorrow tell, 

Bend with the breeze their heads, beside a crystal 

And makes ameeting seemmosthke a dear farewell. 

stream. 


XVII. 

XXIII. 

On a friendly deck reposing 

Through a haze of human nature, 

They at length for Venice steer ; 

Glorified by heavenly light, 

There, when they had closed their voyage, 

Looked the beautiful Deliverer 

One, who daily on the pier 

On that overpowering sight, 

Watched for tidings from the East, beheld his Lord, 

While across her virgin cheek pure blushes strayed, 

Fell down and clasped his knees for joy, not 

For every tender sacrifice her heart had made. 

uttering word. 


XVIII. 

xxiv. 

Mutual was the sudden transport ; 

Ou the ground the weeping Countess 

Breathless questions followed fast, 

Knelt, and kissed the Stranger's hand ; 

Years contracting to a moment, 

Act of soul-devoted homage, 

Each word greedier than the last ; 

Pledge of an eternal band : 

" Hie thee to the Countess, friend ! return with 

Nor did aught of future days that kiss belie, 

speed, 

Which, with a generous shout, the crowd did ratify. 

And of this Stranger speak by whom her lord was 


freed. 



XXV. 

XIX. 

Constant to the fan.' Armenian, 

Say that I, who might have languished, 

Gentle pleasures round her moved, 

Drooped and pined till life was spent, 

Like a tutelary spirit 

Now before the gates of Stolberg 

Reverenced, like a sister, loved. 

My Deliverer would present 

Christian meekness smoothed for all the path of 

For a crowning recompense, the precious grace 

life, 

Of her who in my heart still holds her ancient 

Who, loving most, should wiseliest love, then only 

place. 

strife. 

 POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

xx vr. 

Sav not you love the delicate treat, 

Mute memento of that union 

But like it,, enjoy it, and thankfully eat. 

In a Saxon church survives, 


Where a cross-legged Knight lies sculptured 

Long may you love your pensioner mouse, 

As between two wedded Wives — 

Though one of a tribe that torment the house : 

Figures with armorial signs of race and birth, 

Nor dislike for her cruel sport the cat, 

And the vain rank the pilgi'ims bore while yet on 

Deadly foe both of mouse and rat ; 

earth. 

Remember she follows the law of her kind, 

. 

And Instinct is neither wayward nor blind. 
Then think of her beautiful gliding form, 



Her tread that would scarcely crush a worm, 

XXXV. 

And her soothing song by the winter fire, 

LOVING AND LIKING: 

Soft as the dying throb of the lyre. 

IRREGULAR VERSES, 



I would not circumscribe your love : 

ADDRESSED TO A CHILD. 

It may soar with the eagle and brood -with the dove 

(BY MY SISTER.) 

May pierce the earth with the patient mole, 

There 's more in words than I can teach : 

Or track the hedgehog to his hole. 

Yet listen, Child ! — I would not preach ; 

Loving and liking are the solace of life, 

But only give some plain directions 

Rock the cradle of joy, smooth the death-bed o 

To guide your speech and your affections. 

strife. 

Say not you love a roasted fowl, 

You love your father and your mother, 

But you may love a screaming owl, 

Your grown-up and your baby brother ; 

And, if you can, the unwieldy toad 

You love your sister, and your friends, 

That crawls from his secure abode 

And countless blessings which God sends : 

Within the mossy garden wall 

And while these right affections play, 

When evening dews begin to fall. 

You live each moment of your day ; 

Oh mark the beauty of his eye : 

They lead you on to full content, 

What wonders in that circle he ! 

And likings fresh and innocent, 

So clear, so bright, our fathers said 

That store the mind, the memory feed, 

He wears a jewel in his head ! 

And prompt to many a gentle deed : 

And when, upon some showery day, 

But likings come, and pass away ; 

Into a path or public way 

'Tis love that remains till our latest day : 

A frog leaps out from bordering grass, 

Our heavenward guide is holy love, 

Startling the timid as they pass, 

And will be our bliss with saints above. && 

Do you observe him, and endeavour 
To take the intruder into favour ;' 



Learning from him to find a reason 


For a light heart in a dull season. 

XXXVI. 

And you may love him in the pool, 



FAREWELL LINES. 

That is for him a happy school, 


In which he swims as taught by nature, 

'High bliss is only for a higher state,' 

Fit pattern for a human creature, 

But, surely, if severe afflictions borne 

Glancing amid the water bright, 

With patience merit the reward of peace, 

And sending upward sparkling light. 

Peace ye deserve ; and may the solid good, 


Sought by a wise though late exchange, and here 

Nor blush if o'er your heart be stealing 

With bounteous hand beneath a cottage-roof 

A love for things that have no feeling : 

To you accorded, never be withdrawn, 

The spring's first rose by you espied, 

Nor for the world's best promises renounced. 

May fill your breast with joyful pride ; 

Most soothing was it for a welcome Friend, 

And you may love the strawberry-flower, 

Fresh from the crowded city, to behold 

And love the strawberry in its bower ; 

That lonely union, privacy so deep, 

But when the fruit, so often praised 

Such calm employments, such entire content. 

For beauty, to your hp is raised, 

So when the rain is over, the storm laid, 

THE REDBREAST. 

 

A pair of herons oft-times have I seen, 
Upon a rocky islet, side by side, 
Drying their feathers in the mn, at ease ; 
And so, when night with grateful gloom had fallen, 
Two glow-worms in such nearness that they shared, 
As seemed, their soft self-satisfying light, 
Each with the other, on the dewy ground, 
Where He that made them blesses their repose. — 
When wandering among lakes and hills I note, 
Once more, those creatures thus by nature paired, 
And guarded in their tranquil state of life, 
Even, as your happy presence to my mind 
Their union brought, will they repay the debt, 
And send a thankful spirit back to you, 
With hope that we, dear Friends ! shall meet again. 

THE REDBREAST. 
(SUGGESTED IN A WESTMORELAND COTTAGE.) 
Driven in by Autumn's sharpening air 
From half-stripped woods and pastures bare, 
Brisk Robin seeks a kindlier Home : 
Not like a beggar is he come, 
But enters as a looked-for guest, 
Confiding in his ruddy breast, 
As if it were a natural shield 
Charged with a blazon on the field, 
Due to that good and pious deed 
Of which we in the Ballad read. 
But pensive fancies putting by, 
And wild-wood sorrows, speedily 
He plays the expert ventriloquist ; 
And, caught by glimpses now — now missed, 
Puzzles the listener with a doubt 
If the soft voice he throws about 
Comes from within doors or without ! 
Was ever such a sweet confusion, 
Sustained by delicate illusion ? 
He 's at your elbow — to your feeling 
The notes are from the floor or ceiling ; 
And there 's a riddle to be guessed, 
"Till you have marked his heaving chest, 
And busy throat whose sink and swell, 
Betray the Elf that loves to dwell 
In Robin's bosom, as a chosen cell. 
Heart-pleased we smile upon the Bird 
If seen, and with like pleasure stirred 
Commend him, when he's only heard. 

But small and fugitive our gain 
Compared with hers who long hath lain, 
With languid limbs and patient head 
Reposing on a lone sick-bed ; 
Where now, she daily hears a strain 
That cheats her of too busy cares, 
Eases her pain, and helps her prayers. 
And who but this dear Bird beguiled 
The fever of that pale-faced Child ; 
Now cooling, with his passing wing, 
Her forehead, like a breeze of Spring : 
Recalling now, with descant soft 
Shed round her pillow from aloft, 
Sweet thoughts of angels hovering nigh, 
And the invisible sympathy 
Of 'Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and John, 
Blessing the bed she lies upon % ' 
And sometimes, just as listening ends 
In slumber, with the cadence blends 
A dream of that low-warbled hymn 
Which old folk, fondly pleased to trim 
Lamps of faith, now burning dim, 
Say that the Cherubs carved in stone, 
When clouds gave way at dead of night 
And the ancient church was filled with light, 
Used to sing in heavenly tone, 
Above and round the sacred places 
They guard, with winged baby-faces. 
Thrice happy Creature ! in all lands 
Nurtured by hospitable hands : 
Free entrance to this cot has he, 
Entrance and exit both yet free ; 
And, when the keen unruffled weather 
That thus brings man and bird together, 
Shall with its pleasantness be past, 
And casement closed and door made fast, 
To keep at bay the howling blast, 
He needs not fear the season's rage, 
For the whole house is Robin's cage. 
Whether the bird flit here or there, 
O'er table lilt, or perch on chair, 
Though some may frown and make a stir, 
To scare him as a trespasser, 
And he belike will flinch or start, 
Good friends he has to take his part ; 
One chiefly, who with voice and look 
Pleads for him from the chimney-nook, 
Where sits the Dame, and wears away 

 The words — 
' Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and John, 
Bless the bed that I lie on,' 
are part of a child's prayer, still in general use through 
the northern counties. 

 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

Her long and vacant holiday ; 
With images about her heart, 
Reflected from the years gone by, 
On human nature's second infancy. 

. 

xxxvm. 
HER EYES ARE WILD. 
i. 
Her eyes are wild, her head is bare, 
The sun has burnt her coal-black hair 
Her eyebrows have a rusty stain, 
And she came far from over the main. 
She has a baby on her arm, 
Or else she were alone : 
And underneath the hay-stack warm, 
And on the greenwood stone, 
She talked and sung the woods among, 
And it was in the English tongue. 

" Sweet babe ! they say that I am mad, 
But nay, my heart is far too glad ; 
And I am happy when I sing 
Full many a sad and doleful thing : 
Then, lovely baby, do not fear ! 
I pray thee have no fear of me ; 
But safe as in a cradle, here 
My lovely baby ! thou shalt be : 
To thee I know too much I owe ; 
I cannot work thee any woe. 

A fire was once within my brain ; 
And in my head a dull, dull pain ; 
And fiendish faces, one, two, three, 
Hung at my breast, and pulled at me ; 
But then there came a sight of joy ; 
It came at once to do me good ; 
I waked, and saw my little boy, 
My little boy of flesh and blood ; 
Oh joy for me that sight to see ! 
For he was here, and only he. 

Suck, little babe, oh suck again ! 
It cools my blood ; it cools my brain ; 
Tby lips I feel them, baby ! they 
Draw from my heart the pain away. 
Oh ! press me with thy little hand ; 
It loosens something at my chest ; 

About that tight and deadly band 
I feel thy little fingers prest. 
The breeze I see is in the tree : 
It comes to cool my babe and me. 

Oh ! love me, love me, little boy ! 
Thou art thy mother's only joy ; 
And do not dread the waves below, 
When o'er the sea-rock's edge we go ; 
The high crag cannot work me harm, 
Nor leaping torrents when they howl ; 
The babe I carry on my arm, 
He saves for me my precious soul ; 
Then happy he ; for blest am I ; 
Without me my sweet babe would die. 

Then do not fear, my boy ! for thee 
Bold as a lion will I be ; 
And I will always be thy guide, 
Through hollow snows and rivers wide. 
I ' build an Indian bower ; I know 
The leaves that make the softest bed : 
And, if from me thou wilt not go, 
But still be true till I am dead, 
My pretty thing ! then thou shalt sing 
As merry as the birds in spring. 

Thy father cares not for my breast, 
'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest ; 
'Tis all thine own ! — and, if its hue 
Be changed, that was so fair to view, 
Tis fair enough for thee, my dove ! 
My beauty, little child, is flown, 
But thou wilt live with me in love ; 
And what if my poor cheek be brown ? 
'Tis well for me, thou canst not see 
How pale and wan it else would be. 

Dread not their taunts, my little Life ; 
I am thy father's wedded wife ; 
And underneath the spreading tree 
We two will live in honesty. 
If his sweet boy he could forsake, 
With me he never would have stayed : 
From him no harm my babe can take ; 
But he, poor man ! is wretched made ; 
And every day we two will pray 
For him that 's gone and far away. 

POEMS FOUNDED ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

 

I ' teach my boy the sweetest things : 
I ' teach him how the owlet sings. 
My little babe ! thy lips are still, 
And thou hast almost sucked thy fill. 
— Where art thou gone, my own dear child ? 
What wicked looks are those I see ? 
Alas ! alas ! that look so wild, 
It never, never came from me : 
If thou art mad, my pretty lad, 
Then I must be for ever sad. 

Oh ! smile on me, my little lamb ! 
For I thy own dear mother am : 
My love for thee has well been tried : 
I 've sought thy father far and wide. 
I know the poisons of the shade ; 
I know the earth-nuts fit for food : 
Then, pretty dear, be not afraid : 
We ' find thy father in the wood. 
Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away ! 
And there, my babe, we ' five for aye." 
. 

 

POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

ADVERTISEMENT. 
By persons resident in the country and attached to rural objects, many places will be found unnamed or of unknown 
names, where little Incidents must have occurred, or feelings been experienced, which will have given to such place 
a private and peculiar interest. From a wish to give some sort of record to such Incidents, and renew the gratification 
of uch feelings, Names have been given to Places by the Author and some of his Friends, and the following Poems 
written in consequence. 

Ix was an April morning : fresh and clear 
The Rivulet, delighting in its strength, 
Ran with a young man's speed ; and yet the voice 
Of waters which the winter had supplied 
Was softened down into a vernal tone. 
The spirit of enjoyment and desire, 
And hopes and wishes, from all living things 
Wont circling, like a multitude of sounds. 
Tlio budding groves seemed eager to urge on 
The steps of June ; as if then' various hues 
Were only hindrances that stood between 
Them and their object : but, meanwhile, prevailed 
Such an entire contentment in the air 
That every naked ash, and tardy tree 
Yet leafless, showed as if the countenance 
With which it looked on this delightful day 
Were native to the summer. — Up the brook 
I roamed in the confusion of my heart. 
Alive to all things and forgetting all. 
At length I to a sudden turning came 
In this continuous glen, where down a rock 
The Stream, so ardent in its course before, 
Sent forth such sallies of glad sound, that all 
Which I till then had heard, appeared the voice 
Of common pleasure : beast and bird, the lamb, 
The shepherd's dog, the linnet and the thrush 
Vied with this waterfall, and made a song, 
Which, while I listened, seemed like the wild growth 
Or like some natural produce of the air, 
That could not cease to be. Green leaves were here ; 
But 'twas the foliage of the rocks — the birch, 
The yew, the holly, and the bright green thorn, 
With hanging islands of resplendent furze : 
And, on a summit, distant a short space, 
By any who should look beyond the dell, 
A single mountain-cottage might be seen. 
I gazed and gazed, and to myself I said, 

" Our thoughts at least are ours ; and this wild nook, 
My Emma, I will dedicate to thee." 
Soon did the spot become my other home, 
My dwelling, and my out-of-doors abode. 
And, of the Shepherds who have seen me there, 
To whom I sometimes in our idle talk 
Have told this fancy, two or three, perhaps, 
Years after we are gone and in our graves, 
When they have cause to speak of this wild place 
May call it by the name of Emma's Dell. 
(. 

TO JOANNA. 

Amid the smoke of cities did you pass 
The time of early youth ; aud there you learned, 
From years of quiet industry, to love 
The living Beings by your own fire-side, 
With such a stroDg devotion, that your heart 
Is slow to meet the sympathies of them 
Who look upon the hills with tenderness, 
And make dear friendships with the streams and 
groves. 
Yet we, who are transgressors in this kind, 
Dwelling retired in our simplicity 
Among the woods and fields, we love you well, 
Joanna ! and I guess, since you have been 
So distant from us now for two long years, 
That you will gladly listen to discourse, 
However trivial, if you thence be taught 
That they, with whom you once were happy, talk 
Familiarly of you and of old times. 
While I was seated, now some ten days past, 
Beneath those lofty firs, that overtop 
Their ancient neighbour, the old steeple-tower, 
The Vicar from his gloomy house hard by 

POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

 

Came forth to greet me ; and when he had asked, 
" How fares Joanna, that wild-hearted Maid ! 
And when will she return to us ?" he paused ; 
And, after short exchange of village news, 
He with grave looks demanded, for what cause, 
Reviving obsolete idolatry, 
I, like a Runic Priest, in characters 
Of formidable size had chiselled out 
Some uncouth name upon the native rock, 
Above the Rotha, by the forest-side. 
— Now, by those dear immunities of heart 
Engendered between malice and true love, 
I was not loth to be so catechised, 
And this was my reply : — " As it befel, 
One summer morning we had walked abroad 
At break of day, Joanna and myself. 
— 'Twas that delightful season when the broom, 
Full- flowered, and visible on every steep, 
Along the copses runs in veins of gold. 
Our pathway led us on to Rotha's banks ; 
And when we came in front of that tall rock 
That eastward looks, I there stopped short — and 
stood 
Tracing the lofty barrier with my eye 
From base to summit ; such delight I found 
To note in shrub and tree, in stone and flower 
That intermixture of delicious hues, 
Along so vast a surface, all at once, 
In one impression, by connecting force 
Of then' own beauty, imaged in the heart. 
— When I had gazed perhaps two minutes' space, 
Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld 
That ravishment of mine, and laughed aloud. 
The Rock, like something starting from a sleep, 
Took up the Lady's voice, and laughed again ; 
That ancient Woman seated on Helm-crag 
Was ready with her cavern ; Hammar-scar, 
And the tall Steep of Silver-how, sent forth 
A noise of laughter ; southern Loughrigg heard, 
And Fairfield answered with a mountain tone ; 
Helvellyn far into the clear blue sky 
Carried the Lady's voice, — old Skiddaw blew 
His speaking-trumpet ; — back out of the clouds 
Of Glaramara southward came the voice ; 
And Kirkstone tossed it from his misty head. 
— Now whether (said I to our cordial Friend, 
Who in the hey-day of astonishment 
Smiled in my face) this were in simple truth 
A work accomplished by the brotherhood 
Of ancient mountains, or my ear was touched 
With dreams and visionary impulses 
To me alone imparted, sure I am 
That there was a loud uproar in the hills. 
And, while we both were listening, to my side 

The fair Joanna drew, as if she wished 
To shelter from some object of her fear. 
— Andhence.long afterwards, when eighteen moons . 
Were wasted, as I chanced to walk alone 
Beneath this rock, at sunrise, on a calm 
And silent morning, I sat down, and there, 
In memory of affections old and true, 
I chiselled out in those rude characters 
Joanna's name deep in the living stone : — 
And I, and all who dwell by my fireside, 
Have called the lovely rock, Joanna's Rock." 
H. 
Note. — In Cumberland and Westmoreland are several 
Inscriptions, upon the native rock, which, from the wast- 
ing of time, and the rudeness of the workmanship, have 
been mistaken for Runic. They are without doubt Roman. 
The Rotha, mentioned in this poem, is the River which, 
flowing through the lakes of Grasmere and Rydale, falls 
into Wynandermere. On Helmcrag, that impressive single 
mountain at the head of the Vale of Grasmere, is a rock 
which from most points of view bears a striking resem- 
blance to an old Woman cowering. Close by this rock is 
one of those fissures or caverns, which in the language of 
the country are called dungeons. Most of the mountains 
here mentioned immediately surround the Vale of Gras- 
mere ; of the others, some are at a considerable distance, 
but they belong to the same cluster. 

There is an Eminence, — of these our hills 
The last that parleys with the setting sun ; 
We can behold it from our orchard-seat ; 
And, when at evening we pursue our walk 
Along the public way, this Peak, so high 
Above us, and so distant in its height, 
Is visible ; and often seems to send 
Its own deep quiet to restore our hearts. 
The meteors make of it a favourite haunt : 
The star of Jove, so beautiful and large 
In the mid heavens, is never half so fair 
As when he shines above it. 'Tis in truth 
The loneliest place we have among the clouds. 
And She who dwells with me, whom I have loved 
With such communion, that no place on earth 
Can ever be a solitude to me, 
Hath to this lonely Summit given my Name. 
. 

A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags, 
A rude and natural causeway, interposed 
Between the water and a winding slope 
Of copse and thicket, leaves the eastern shore 

no 


POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

Of Grasmere safe in its own privacy : 
And there myself and two beloved Friends, 
One calm September morning, ere the mist 
Had altogether yielded to the sun, 
Sauntered on this retired and difficult way. 
Ill suits the road with one in haste ; but we 
Played with our time ; and, as we strolled along. 
It was our occupation to observe 
Such objects as the waves had tossed ashore — 
Feather, or leaf, or weed, or withered bough, 
Each on the other heaped, along the line 
Of the dry wreck. And, in our vacant mood, 
Not seldom did we stop to watch some tuft 
Of dandelion seed or thistle's beard, 
That skimmed the surface of the dead calm lake, 
Suddenly halting now — a lifeless stand ! 
And starting off again with freak as sudden ; 
In all its sportive wanderings, all the while, 
Making report of an invisible breeze 
That was its wings, its chariot, and its horse, 
Its playmate, rather say, its moving soul. 
And often, trifling with a privilege 
Alike indulged to all, we paused, one now, 
And now the other, to point out, perchance 
To pluck, some flower or water-weed, too fair 
Either to be divided from the place 
On which it grew, or to be left alone 
To its own beauty. Many such there are, 
Fair ferns and flowers, and chiefly that tall fern, 
So stately, of the queen Osmunda named ; 
Plant lovelier, in its own retired abode 
On Grasmere's beach, than Naiad by the side 
Of Grecian brook, or Lady of the Mere, 
Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance. 
— So fared we that bright morning : from the fields, 
Meanwhile, a noise was heard, the busy niirth 
Of reapers, men and women, boys and girls. 
Delighted much to listen to those sounds, 
And feeding thus our fancies, we advanced 
Along the indented shore ; when suddenly, 
Through a thin veil of glittering haze was seen 
Before us, on a point of jutting land, 
The tall and upright figure of a Man 
Attired in peasant's garb, who stood alone, 
Angling beside the margin of the lake. 
" Improvident and reckless," we exclaimed, 
" The Man must be, who thus can lose a day 
Of the mid harvest, when the labourer's hire 
Is ample, and some little might be stored 
Wherewith to cheer him in the winter time." 
Thus talking of that Peasant, we approached 
Close to the spot where with his rod and line 
He stood alone ; whereat he turned his head 
To greet us — and we saw a Man worn down 

By sickness, gaunt and lean, with sunken cheeks 
And wasted limbs, his legs so long and lean 
That for my single self I looked at them, 
Forgetful of the body they sustained. — 
Too weak to labour in the harvest field, 
The Man was using his best skill to gain 
A pittance from the dead unfeeling lake 
That knew not of his wants. I will not say 
What thoughts immediately were ours, nor how 
The happy idleness of that sweet morn, 
With all its lovely images, was changed 
To serious musing and to self-reproach. 
Nor did we fail to see within ourselves 
What need there is to be reserved in speech, 
And temper all our thoughts with charity. 
— Therefore, unwilling to forget that day, 
My Friend, Myself, and She who then received 
The same admonishment, have called the place 
By a memorial name, uncouth indeed 
As e'er by mariner was given to bay 
Or foreland, on a new-discovered coast ; 
And Point Rash-Judgment is the name it bears. 
. 

TO M. H. 

Our walk was far among the ancient trees : 
There was no road, nor any woodman's path ; 
But a thick umbrage — checking the wild growth 
Of weed and sapling, along soft green turf 
Beneath the branches — of itself had made 
A track, that brought us to a slip of lawn, 
And a small bed of water in the woods. 
All round this pool both flocks and herds might drink 
On its firm margin, even as from a well, 
Or some stone-basin which the herdsman's hand 
Had shaped for their refreshment ; nor did sun, 
Or wind from any quarter, ever come, 
But as a blessing to this calm recess, 
This glade of water and this one green field. 
The spot was made by Nature for herself; 
The travellers know it not, and 'twill remain 
Unknown to them ; but it is beautiful ; 
And if a man should plant his cottage near, 
Should sleep beneath the shelter of its trees, 
And blend its waters with his daily meal, 
He would so love it, that in his death-hour 
Its image would survive among his thoughts : 
And. therefore, my sweet Mary, this still Nook, 
With all its beeches, we have named from You ! 
. 

POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

Ill 

When, to the attractions of the busy world, 
Preferring studious leisure, I had chosen 
A habitation in this peaceful Vale, 
Sharp season followed of continual storm 
In deepest winter ; and, from week to week, 
Pathway, and lane, and public road, were clogged 
With frequent showers of snow. Upon a hill 
At a short distance from my cottage, stands 
A stately Fir-grove, whither I was wont 
To hasten, for I found, beneath the roof 
Of that perennial shade, a cloistral place 
Of refuge, with an unincumbered floor. 
Here, in safe covert, on the shallow snow, 
And, sometimes, on a speck of visible earth, 
The redbreast near me hopped ; nor was I loth 
To sympathise with vulgar coppice birds 
That, for protection from the nipping blast, 
Hither repaired. — A single beech-tree grew 
Within this grove of firs ! and, on the fork 
Of that one beech, appeared a thrush's nest ; 
A last year's nest, conspicuously built 
At such small elevation from the ground 
As gave sure sign that they, who in that house 
Of nature and of love had made their home 
Amid the fir-trees, all the summer long 
Dwelt in a tranquil spot. And oftentimes, 
A few sheep, stragglers from some mountain-flock, 
Would watch my motions with suspicious stare, 
From the remotest outskirts of the grove, — 
Some nook where they had made their final stand, 
Huddling together from two fears — the fear 
Of me and of the storm. Full many an hour 
Hei'e did I lose. But in this grove the trees 
Had been so thickly planted, and had thriven 
In such perplexed and intricate array ; 
That vainly did I seek, beneath their stems 
A length of open space, where to and fro 
My feet might move without concern or care ; 
And, baffled thus, though earth from day to day 
Was fettered, and the air by storm disturbed, 
I ceased the shelter to frequent, — and prized, 
Less than I wished to prize, that calm recess. 
The snows dissolved, and genial Spring returned 
To clothe the fields with verdure. Other haunts 
Meanwhile were mine ; till, one bright April day, 
By chance retiring from the glare of noon 
To this forsaken covert, there I found 
A hoary pathway traced between the trees, 
And winding on with such an easy line 
Along a natural opening, that I stood 

Much wondering how I could have sought in vaiD 
For what was now so obvious. To abide, 
For an allotted interval of ease, 
Under my cottage-roof, had gladly come 
From the wild sea a cherished Visitant ; 
And with the sight of this same path — begun, 
Begun and ended, in the shady grove, 
Pleasant conviction flashed upon my mind 
That, to this opportune recess allured, 
He had surveyed it with a finer eye, 
A heart more wakeful ; and had worn the track 
By pacing here, unwearied and alone, 
In that habitual restlessness of foot 
That haunts the Sailor measuring o'er and o'er 
His short domain upon the vessel's deck, 
While she pursues her course through the dreary sea. 
When thou hadst quitted Esthwaite's pleasant 
shore, 
And taken thy first leave of those green hills 
And rocks that were the play-ground of thy youth, 
Year followed year, my Brother ! and we two, 
Conversing not, knew little in what mould 
Each other's mind was fashioned ; and at length, 
When once again we met in Grasmere Vale, 
Between us there was little other bond 
Than common feelings of fraternal love. 
But thou, a School-boy, to the sea hadst carried 
Undying recollections ; Nature there 
Was with thee ; she, who loved us both, she still 
Was with thee ; and even so didst thou become 
A silent Poet ; from the solitude 
Of the vast sea didst bring a watchful heart 
Still couchant, an inevitable ear, 
And an eye practised like a blind man's touch. 
— Back to the joyless Ocean thou art gone ; 
Nor from this vestige of thy musing hours 
Could I withhold thy honoured name, — and now 
I love the fir-grove with a perfect love. 
Thither do I withdraw when cloudless suns 
Shine hot, or wind blows troublesome and strong ; 
And there I sit at evening, when the steep 
Of Silver-how, and Grasmere's peaceful lake, 
And ope green island, gleam between the stems 
Of the dark firs, a visionary scene ! 
And, while I gaze upon the spectacle 
Of clouded splendour, on this dream-like sight 
Of solemn loveliness, I think on thee, 
My Brother, and on all which thou hast lost. 
Nor seldom, if I rightly guess, while Thou, 
Muttering the verses which I muttered first 
Among the mountains, through the midnight watch 
Art pacing thoughtfully the vessel's deck 
In some far region, here, while o'er my head, 

 

POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES. 

A.t every impulse of the moving breeze, 
The fir-grove murmurs with a sea-like sound, 
Alone I tread this path ; — for aught I know, 
Timing my steps to thine ; and, with a store 
Of undistinguishable sympathies, 
Mingling most earnest wishes for the day 
When we, and others whom we love, shall meet 
A second time, in Grasmere's happy Vale. 
. 
Note This wish was not granted ; the lamented Person 
not long after perished by shipwreck, in discharge of his 
duty as Commander of the Honourable East India Com- 
pany's Vessel, the Earl of Abergavenny. 

Forth from a jutting ridge, around whose base 
Winds our deep Vale, two heath-clad Rocks ascend 
In fellowship, the loftiest of the pair 
Rising to no ambitious height; yet both, 
O'er lake and stream, mountain and flowery mead, 
Unfolding prospects fair as human eyes 

Ever beheld. Up-led with mutual help, 
To one or other brow of those twin Peaks 
Were two adventurous Sisters wont to climb, 
And took no note of the hour while thence the 
gazed, 
The blooming heath their couch, gazed, side 
side, 
In speechless admiration. I, a witness 
And frequent sharer of their calm delight 
With thankful heart, to either Eminence 
Gave the baptismal name each Sister bore. 
Now are they parted, far as Death's cold hand 
Hath power to part the Spirits of those who love 
As they did love. Ye kindred Pinnacles — 
That, while the generations of mankind 
Follow each other to their hiding-place 
In time's abyss, are privileged to endure 
Beautiful in yourselves, and richly graced 
With like command of beauty — grant your aid 
For Mary's humble, Sarah's silent, claim, 
That their pure joy in nature may survive 
From age to age in blended memory. 
, 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

A MORNING EXERCISE. 
Fancy, who leads the pastimes of the glad, 
Full oft is pleased a wayward dart to throw ; 
Sending sad shadows after things not sad, 
Peopling the harmless fields with signs of woe : 
Beneath her sway, a simple forest cry 
Becomes an echo of man's misery. 
Blithe ravens croak of death ; and when the owl 
Tries his two voices for a favourite strain — ■ 
Tu-whit — Tu-whoo! the unsuspecting fowl 
Forebodes mishap or seems but to complain ; 
Fancy, intent to harass and annoy, 
Can thus pervert the evidence of joy. 
Through border wilds where naked Indians stray, 
Myriads of notes attest her subtle skill ; 
A feathered task-master cries, "Work away ! " 
And, in thy iteration, u Whip poor Will ! " 
Is heard the spirit of a toil-worn slave, 
Lashed out of life, not cpiiet in the grave. 
What wonder ? at her bidding, ancient lays 
Steeped in dire grief the voice of Philomel ; 
And that fleet messenger of summer days, 
The Swallow, twittered subject to like spell ; 
But ne'er could Fancy bend the buoyant Lark 
To melancholy service — hark ! hark ! 
The daisy sleeps upon the dewy lawn, 
Not lifting yet the head that evening bowed ; 
But He is risen, a later star of dawn, 
GUttering and twinkling near yon rosy cloud ; 
Bright gem instinct with music, vocal spark ; 
The happiest bird that sprang out of the Ark ! 
Hail, blest above all kinds ! — Supremely skilled 
j Restless with fixed to balance, high with low, 
: Thou leav'st the halcyon free her hopes to build 
j On such forbearance as the deep may show ; 
! Perpetual flight, unchecked by earthly ties, 
Leav'st to the wandering bird of paradise. 

Faithful, though swift as lightning, the meek do ve ; 
Yet more hath Nature reconciled in thee ; 
So constant with thy downward eye of love, 
Yet, in aerial singleness, so free ; 
So humble, yet so ready to rejoice 
In power of wing and never-wearied voice. 
To the last point of vision, and beyond, 
Mount, daring warbler ! — that love-prompted strain, 
('Twixt thee and thine a never-failing bond) 
Thrills not the less the bosom of the plain : 
Yet might'st thou seem, proud privilege ! to sing 
All independent of the leafy spring. 
How would it please old Ocean to partake, 
With sailors longing for a breeze in vain, 
The harmony thy notes most gladly make 
Where earth resembles most his own domain ! 
Urania's self might welcome with pleased ear 
These matins mounting towards her native sphere. 
Chanter by heaven attracted, whom no bars 
To day-light known deter from that pursuit, 
'Tis well that some sage instinct, when the stars 
Come forth at evening, keeps Thee still and mute ; 
For not an eyelid could to sleep incline 
Wert thou among them, singing as they shine ! 
. 

 See Waterton's Wanderings in South America. 

A FLOWER GARDEN, 
AT COLEOBTON HALL, LEICESTERSHIRE. 
Tell me, ye Zephyrs ! that unfold, 
While fluttering o'er this gay Recess, 
Pinions that fanned the teeming mould 
Of Eden's blissful wilderness, 
Did only softly-stealing hours 
There close the peaceful lives of flowers \ 
Say, when the moving creatures saw 
All kinds commingled without fear, 
Prevailed a like indulgent law 
For the still growths that prosper here ? 
Did wanton fawn and kid forbear 
The half-blown rose, the lily spare ? 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

Or peeped they often from their beds 
And prematurely disappeared, 
Devoured like pleasure ere it spreads 
A bosom to the sun endeared ? 
If such then.' harsh untimely doom, 
It falls not here on bud or bloom. 
All summer-long the happy Eve 
Of this fair Spot her flowers may bind, 
Nor e'er, with ruffled fancy, grieve, 
From the next glance she casts, to find 
That love for little things by Fate 
Is rendered vain as love for great. 
Yet, where the guardian fence is wound, 
So subtly are our eyes beguiled 
We see not nor suspect a bound, 
No more than in some forest wild ; 
The sight is free as ah' — or crost 
Only by art in nature lost. 
And, though the jealous turf refuse 
By random footsteps to be prest, 
And feed on never-sullied dews, 
Ye, gentle breezes from the west, 
With all the ministers of hope 
Are tempted to this sunny slope ! 
And hither throngs of birds resort ; 
Some, inmates lodged in shady nests, 
Some, perched on stems of stately port 
That nod to welcome transient guests ; 
While hare and leveret, seen at play, 
Appear not more shut out than they. 
Apt emblem (for reproof of pride) 
This delicate Enclosure shows 
Of modest kindness, that would hide 
The firm protection she bestows ; 
Of manners, like its viewless fence, 
Ensuring peace to innocence. 
Thus spake the moral Muse — her wing 
Abruptly spreading to depart, 
She left that farewell offering, 
Memento for some docile heart ; 
That may respect the good old age 
When Fancy was Truth's willing Page ; 
And Truth would skim the flowery glade, 
Though entering but as Fancy's Shade. 
. 

A whirl-blast from behind the hill 
Rushed o'er the wood with startling sound ; 
Then — all at once the air was still, 
And showers of hailstones pattered round. 
Where leafless oaks towered high above, 
I sat within an undergrove 
Of tallest hollies, tall and green ; 
A fairer bower was never seen. 
From year to year the spacious floor 
With withered leaves is covered o'er, 
And all the year the bower is green. 
But see ! where'er the hailstones drop 
The withered leaves all skip and hop ; 
There's not a breeze — no breath of air- 
Yet here, and there, and every where 
Along the floor, beneath the shade 
By those embowering hollies made, 
The leaves in myriads jump and spring, 
As if with pipes and music rare 
Some Robin Good-fellow were there, 
And all those leaves, in festive glee, 
Wei'e dancing to the minstrelsy. 

THE WATERFALL AND THE EGLANTINE. 
i. 
" Begone, thou fond presumptuous Elf," 
Exclaimed an angry Voice, 
" Nor dare to thrust thy foolish self 
Between me and my choice !" 
A small Cascade fresh swoln with snows 
Thus threatened a poor Briaivrose, 
That, all bespattered with his foam, 
And dancing high and dancing low, 
Was living, as a child might know, 
In an unhappy home. 

"Dost thou presume my course to block? 
Off, off ! or, puny Thing ! 
I ' hurl thee headlong with the rock 
To which thy fibres cling." 
The Flood was tyrannous and strong ; 
The patient Briar suffered long, 
Nor did he utter groan or sigh, 
Hoping the danger would be past ; 
But, seeing no relief, at last, 
He ventured to reply. 


POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

"Ah !" said the Briar, "blame me not ; 
Why should we dwell in strife ? 
We who in this sequestered spot 
Once lived a happy life ! 
You stirred me on my rocky bed — 
What pleasure through my veins you spread 
The summer long, from day to day, 
My leaves you freshened and bedewed ; 
Nor was it common gratitude 
That did your cares repay. 

When spring came on with bud and bell, 
Among these rocks did I 
Before you hang my wreaths to tell 
That gentle days were nigh ! 
And in the sultry summer hours, 
I sheltered you with leaves and flowers ; 
And in my leaves — now shed and gone, 
The linnet lodged, and for us two 
Chanted his pretty songs, when you 
Had little voice or none. 

But now proud thoughts are in your breast — 
What grief is mine you see, 
Ah ! would you think , even yet how blest 
Together we might be ! 
Though of both leaf and flower bereft, 
Some ornaments to me are left — 
Rich store of scarlet hips is mine, 
With which I, in my humble way, 
Would deck you many a winter day, 
A happy Eglantine ! " 
VI. 
What more he said I cannot tell, 
The Torrent clown the rocky dell 
Came thundering loud and fast ; 
I listened, nor aught else could hear ; 
The Briar quaked — and much I fear 
Those accents were his last. 

THE OAK AND THE BROOM. 
A TASTORAL. 
r. 
His simple truths did Andrew glean 
Beside the babbling rills ; 
A careful student he had been 
Among the woods and hills. 

One winter's night, when through the trees 
The wind was roaring, on his knees 
His yoimgest born did Andrew hold : 
And while the rest, a ruddy quire, 
Were seated round their blazing fire, 
This Tale the Shepherd told. 

" I saw a crag, a lofty stone 
As ever tempest beat ! 
Out of its head an Oak had grown, 
A Broom out of its feet. 
The time was March, a cheerful noon — 
The thaw-wind, with the breath of June, 
Breathed gently from the warm south-west : 
When, in a voice sedate with age, 
This Oak, a giant and a sage, 
His neighbour thus addressed : — 

' Eight weary weeks, through rock and clay, 
Along this mountain's edge, 
The Frost hath wrought both night and day, 
Wedge driving after wedge. 
Look up ! and think, above your head 
What trouble, surely, will be bred ; 
Last night I heard a crash — 'tis true, 
The splinters took another road — 
I see them yonder — what a load 
For such a Thing as you ! 

You are preparing as before, 
To deck your slender shape ; 
And yet, just three years back — no more — 
You had a strange escape : 
Down from yon cliff a fragment broke ; 
It thundered down, with fire and smoke, 
And hitherward pursued its way ; 
This ponderous block was caught by me, 
And o'er your head, as you may see, 
"Tis hanging to this day ! 

If breeze or bird to this rough steep 
Your kind's first seed did bear ; 
The breeze had better been asleep, 
The bird caught in a snare : 
For you and your green twigs decoy 
The little witless shepherd-boy 
To come and slumber in your bower ; 
And, trust me, on some sultry noon, 
Both you and he, Heaven knows how soon ! 
Will perish in one hour. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

VI. 

Their nuptial song, a gladsome air ; 

From me this friendly warning take' — 

And to her own green bower the breeze 

The Broom began to doze, 

That instant brought two stripling bees 

And thus, to keep herself awake, 

To rest, or murmur there. 

Did gently interpose : 


'My thanks for your discourse are due ; 

XI. 

That more than what you say is true, 

One night, my Children ! from the north 

I know, and I have known it long ; 

There came a furious blast ; 

Frail is the bond by which we hold 

At break of day I ventured forth, 

Our being, whether young or old, 

And near the cliff I passed. 

Wise, foolish, weak, or strong. 

The storm had fallen upon the Oak, 


And struck him with a mighty stroke, 

VII. 

And whirled, and whirled him far away ; 

Disasters, do the best we can, 

And, in one hospitable cleft, 

Will reach both great and small ; 

The little careless Broom was left 

And he is oft the wisest man, 

To live for many a day." 

Who is not wise at all. 

. 

For me, why should I wish to roam  


This spot is my paternal home, 


It is my pleasant heritage ; 


My father many a happy year, 

VI. 

Spread here his careless blossoms, here 

TO A SEXTON. 

Attained a good old age. 



Let thy wheel-barrow alone — 

VIII. 

Wherefore, Sexton, piling still 

Even such as his may be my lot. 

In thy bone-house bone on bone ? 

What cause have I to haunt 

'Tis already like a hill 

My heart with terrors ? Am I not 

In a field of battle made, 

In truth a favoured plant ! 

Where three thousand skulls are laid; 

On me such bounty Summer pours, 

These died in peace each with the other,. — ■ 

That I am covered o'er with flowers ; 

Father, sister, friend, and brother. 

And, when the Frost is in the sky, 


My branches are so fresh and gay 

Mark the spot to which I point ! 

That you might look at me and say, 

From this platform, eight feet square, 

This Plant can never die. 

Take not even a finger-joint: 


Andrew's whole fire-side is there. 

IX. 

Here, alone, before thine eyes, 
Simon's sickly daughter lies, 

The butterfly, all green and gold, 

To me hath often flown, 


From weakness now, and pain defended, 

Here in my blossoms to behold 

Whom he twenty winters tended. 

Wings lovely as his own. 


When grass is chill with rain or dew, 


Beneath my shade, the mother-ewe 

Look but at the gardener's pride — 

Lies with her infant lamb ; I see 

How he glories, when he sees 

The love they to each other make, 

Roses, lilies, side by side, 

And the sweet joy which they partake, 

Violets in families ! 

It is a joy to me.' 

By the heart of Man, his tears, 


By his hopes and by his fears, 

X. 

Thou, too heedless, art the Warden 

Her voice was blithe, her heart was light ; 

Of a far superior garden. 

The Broom might have pursued 


Her speech, until the stars of night 

Thus then, each to other dear, 

Their journey had renewed ; 

Let them all in quiet lie, 

But in the branches of the oak 

Andrew there, and Susan here, 

Two ravens now began to croak 

Neighbours in mortality. 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

And, should I live through sun and rain 
Seven widowed years without my Jane, 
Sexton, do not then remove her, 
Let one grave hold the Loved and Lover ! 
. 

TO THE DAISY. 

' Her divine skill taught me this, 
That from every thing I saw 
I could some instruction draw, 
And raise pleasure to the height 
Through the meanest object's sight. 
By the murmur of a spring, 
Or the least bough's rustelling ; 
By a Daisy whose leaves spread 
Shut when Titan goes to bed ; 
Or a shady bush or tree ; 
She could more infuse in me 
Than all Nature's beauties can 
In some other wiser man.' 
G. Wither. 
In youth from rock to rock I went, 
From hill to hill in discontent 
Of pleasure high and turbulent, 
Most pleased when most uneasy ; 
But now my own delights I make, — 
My thirst at every rill can slake, 
And gladly Nature's love partake, 
Of Thee, sweet Daisy ! 
Thee Winter in the garland wears 
That thinly decks his few grey hairs ; 
Spring parts the clouds with softest airs, 
That she may sun thee ; 
Whole Summer-fields are thine by right ; 
And Autumn, melancholy Wight ! 
Doth in thy crimson head delight 
When rains are on thee. 
In shoals and bands, a morrice train, 
Thou greet'st the traveller in the lane ; 
Pleased at his greeting thee again ; 
Yet nothing daunted, 
Nor grieved if thou be set at nought : 
And oft alone in nooks remote 
We meet thee, like a pleasant thought, 
When such are wanted. 
Be violets in their secret mews 
The flowers the wanton Zephyrs choose ; 
Proud be the rose, with rains and dews 
Her head impearling, 
 His muse. 

Thou liv'st with less ambitious aim, 
Yet hast not gone without thy fame ; 
Thou art indeed by many a claim 
The Poet's darling. 
If to a rock from rains he fly, 
Or, some bright day of April sky, 
Imprisoned by hot sunshine He 
Near the green holly, 
And wearily at length should fare ; 
He needs but look about, and there 
Thou art !— a friend at hand, to scare 
His melancholy. 
A hundred times, by rock or bower, 
Ere thus I have lain couched an hour, 
Have I derived from thy sweet power 
Some apprehension ; 
Some steady love ; some brief delight ; 
Some memory that had taken flight ; 
Some chime of fancy wrong or right ; 
Or stray invention. 
If stately passions in me burn, 
And one chance look to Thee should turn, 
I drink out of an humbler urn 
A lowlier pleasure ; 
The homely sympathy that heeds 
The common life, our nature breeds ; 
A wisdom fitted to the needs 
Of hearts at leisure. 
Fresh-smitten by the morning ray, 
When thou art up, alert and gay, 
Then, cheerful Flower ! my spirits play 
With kindred gladness : 
And when, at dusk, by dews opprest 
Thou sink'st, the image of thy rest 
Hath often eased my pensive breast 
Of careful sadness. 
And all day long I number yet, 
All seasons through, another debt, 
Which I, wherever thou art met, 
To thee am owing; 
An instinct call it, a blind sense ; 
A happy, genial influence, 
Coming one knows not how, nor whence. 
Nor whither going. 
Child of the Year ! that round dost run 
Thy pleasant course, — when day's begun 
As ready to salute the sun 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

As lark or leveret. 
Thy long-lost praise thou shalt regain ; 
Nor be less dear to future men 
Than in old time ; — thou not in vain 
Art Nature's favourite. 

TO THE SAME FLOWER. 
With little here to do or see 
Of things that in the great world be, 
Daisy ! again I talk to thee, 
For thou art worthy, 
Thou unassuming Common-place 
Of Nature, with that homely face, 
And yet with something of a grace, 
Which Love makes for thee ! 
Oft on the dappled turf at ease 
I sit, and play with similies, 
Loose types of things through all degrees, 
Thoughts of thy raising : 
And many a fond and idle name 
I give to thee, for praise or blame, 
As is the humour of the game, 
While I am gazing. 
A nun demure of lowly port; 
Or sprightly maiden, of Love's court, 
In thy simplicity the sport 
Of all temptations ; 
A queen in crown of rubies drest ; 
A starveling in a scanty vest ; 
Are all, as seems to suit thee best, 
Thy appellations. 
A little cyclops, with one eye 
Staring to threaten and defy, 
That thought comes next — and instantly 
The fj-eak is over, 
The shape will vanish — and behold 
A silver shield with boss of gold, 
That spreads itself, some faery bold 
In fight to cover ! 
I see thee glittering from afar — 
And then thou art a pretty star ; 
Not quite so fan' as many are 

 See, in Chaucer and the elder Poets, the honours 
formerly paid to this flower. 

In heaven above thee ! 
Yet like a star, with glittering crest, 
Self-poised in ah' thou seem'st to rest ; — - 
May peace come never to his nest, 
Who shall reprove thee ! 
Bright Floiver ! for by that name at last, 
When all my reveries are past, 
I call thee, and to that cleave fast, 
Sweet silent creature ! 
That breath'st with me in sun and air, 
Do thou, as thou art wont, repair 
My heart with gladness, and a share 
Of thy meek nature ! 

THE GREEN LINNET. 
Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed 
Their snow-white blossoms on my head, 
With brightest sunshine round me spread 
Of spring's unclouded weather, 
In this sequestered nook how sweet 
To sit upon my orchard-seat ! 
And birds and flowers once more to greet, 
My last year's friends together. 
One have I marked, the happiest guest 
In all this covert of the blest : 
Hail to Thee, far above the rest 
In joy of voice and pinion ! 
Thou, Linnet ! in thy green array, 
Presiding Spirit here to-day, 
Dost lead the revels of the May ; 
And this is thy dominion. 
While birds, and butterflies, and flowers, 
Make all one band of paramours, 
Thou, ranging up and down the bowers, 
Art sole in thy employment : 
A Life, a Presence like the Air, 
Scattering thy gladness without care, 
Too blest with any one to pair ; 
Thyself thy own enjoyment. 
Amid yon tuft of hazel trees, 
That twinkle to the gusty breeze, 
Behold him perched in ecstacies, 
Yet seeming still to hover ; 
There ! where the flutter of his wings 
Upon his back and body flings 
Shadows and sunny glimmerings, 
That cover him all over. 




POEMS OF ' 

rHE FANCY. 

 

My dazzled sight he oft deceives. 



A Brother of the dancing leaves ; 

XI. 


Then flits, and from the cottage-eaves 

TO THE SMALL CELANDINE. 


Pours forth his song in gushes ; 



As if by that exulting strain 
He mocked and treated with disdain 

Pansies, lilies, kingcups, daisies, 


Let them live upon their praises ; 


The voiceless Form he chose to feign, 

Long as there's a sun that sets, 


While fluttering in the bushes. 

Primroses will have their glory ; 


JW. 

Long as there are violets, 
They will have a place in story : 
There 's a flower that shall be mine, 



X. 

'Tis the little Celandine. 


Eyes of some men travel far 


TO A SKY-LARK. 

For the finding of a star ; 


Up with me ! up with me into the clouds .' 

Up and down the heavens they go, 


For thy song, Lark, is strong; 

Men that keep a mighty rout ! 


Up with me, up with me into the clouds ! 

I 'm as great as they, I trow, 


Singing, singing, 

Since the day I found thee out, 


With clouds and sky about thee ringing, 

Little Flower ! — I ' make a stir, 


Lift me, guide me till I find 

Like a sage astronomer. 


That spot which seems so to thy mind ! 

Modest, yet withal an Elf 
Bold, and lavish of thyself ; 


I have walked through wildernesses dreary 

Since we needs must first have met 


And to-day my heart is weary ; 

I have seen thee, high and low, 


Had I now the wings of a Faery, 

Thirty years or more, and yet 


Up to thee would I fly. 

'Twas a face I did not know ; 


There is madness about thee, and joy divine 

Thou hast now, go where I may, 


In that song of thine ; 

Fifty greetings in a day. 


Lift me, guide me high and high 



To thy banqueting-place in the sky. 

Ere a leaf is on a bush, 
In the time before the thrush 


Joyous as morning, 

Has a thought about her nest, 


Thou art laughing and scorning ; 

Thou wilt come with half a call, 


Thou hast a nest for thy love and thy rest, 

Spreading out thy glossy breast 


And, though little troubled with sloth, 

Like a careless Prodigal ; 


Drunken Lark ! thou would'st be loth 

Telling tales about the sun, 


To be such a traveller as I. 

When we 've little warmth, or none. 


Happy, happy Liver, 



With a soul as strong as a mountain river 

Poets, vain men in their mood ! 


Pouring out praise to the almighty Giver, 

Travel with the multitude : 


Joy and jollity be with us both ! 

Never heed them ; I aver 
That they all are wanton wooers ; 
But the thrifty cottager, 


Alao ! my journey, rugged and uneven, 

Who stirs little out of doors, 


Through prickly moors or dusty ways must wind ; 

Joys to spy thee near her home ; 


But healing thee, or others of thy kind, 

Spring is coming, Thou art come ! 


As full of gladness and as free of heaven, 


I, with my fate contented, will plod on, 

Comfort have thou of thy merit, 
Kindly, unassuming Spirit ! 


And hope for higher raptures, when life's day is done. 
. 


Careless of thy neighbourhood, 



Thou dost show thy pleasant face 




 Common Pilewort. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

On the moor, and in the wood, 

Often have I sighed to measure 


In the lane ; — there 's not a place, 

By myself a lonely pleasure, 


Howsoever mean it be, 

Sighed to think, I read a book 


But 'tis good enough for thee. 

Only read, perhaps, by me ; 
Yet I long could overlook 


Ill befal the yellow flowers, 

Thy bright coronet and Thee, 


Children of the flaring hours ! 

And thy arch and wily ways, 


Buttercups, that will be seen, 

And thy store of other praise. 


Whether we will see or no ; 



Others, too, of lofty mien ; 

Blithe of heart, from week to week 


They have done as worldlings do, 

Thou dost play at hide-and-seek ; 


Taken praise that should be thine, 

While the patient primrose sits 


Little, humble Celandine ! 

Like a beggar in the cold, 
Thou, a flower of wiser wits, 


Prophet of delight and mirth, 

Slip'st into thy sheltering hold ; 


Ill-requited upon earth ; 

Liveliest of the vernal train 


Herald of a mighty band, 

When ye all are out again. 


Of a joyous train ensuing, 



Serving at my heart's command, 

Drawn by what peculiar spell, 


Tasks that are no tasks renewing, 

By what charm of sight or smell, 


I will sing, as doth behove, 

Does the dim-eyed curious Bee, 


Hymns in praise of what I love ! 

Labouring for her waxen cells, 


J. 

Fondly settle upon Thee 
Prized above all buds and bells 





Opening daily at thy side, 


XII. 

By the season multiplied? 


TO THE SAME FLOWER. 

Thou art not beyond the moon, 


Pleasures newly found are sweet 

But a thing ' beneath our shoon : ' 


When they lie about our feet : 

Let the bold Discoverer thrid 


February last, my heart 

In his bark the polar sea ; 


First at sight of thee was glad ; 

Rear who will a pyramid ; 


All unheard of as thou art, 

Praise it is enough for me, 


Thou must needs, I think, have had, 

If there be but three or four 


Celandine ! and long ago, 

Who will love my little Flower. 


Praise of which I nothing know. 

 


I have not a doubt but he, 

xnr. 


Whosoe'er the man might be, 

THE SEVEN SISTERS ; 


Who the first with pointed rays 



(Workman worthy to be sainted) 

OR, 


Set the sign-board in a blaze, 

THE SOLITUDE OF BINNORIE. 


When the rising sun he painted, 

i. 


Took the fancy from a glance 

Seven Daughters had Lord Archibald, 


At thy glittering countenance. 

All children of one mother : 
You could not say in one short day 


Soon as gentle breezes bring 

What love they bore each other. 


News of winter's vanishing, 

A garland, of seven lilies, wrought ! 


And the children build their bowers, 

Seven Sisters that together dwell ; 


Sticking 'kerchief-plots of mould 

But he, bold Knight as ever fought, 


All about with full-blown flowers, 

Their Father, took of them no thought, 


Thick as sheep in shepherd's fold ! 

He loved the wars so well. 


With the proudest thou art there, 

Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 


Mantling in the tiny square. 

The solitude of Binnorie ! 


POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

Fresh blows the wind, a western wind, 
And from the shores of Erin, 
Across the wave, a Rover brave 
To Binnorie is steering : 
Right onward to the Scottish strand 
The gallant ship is bome ; 
The warriors leap upon the land, 
And hark ! the Leader of the band 
Hath blown his bugle horn. 
Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 
The solitude of Binnorie. 

Beside a grotto of their own, 
With boughs above them closing, 
The Seven are laid, and in the shade 
They lie like fawns reposing. 
But now, upstarting with affright 
At noise of man and steed, 
Away they fly to left, to right — 
Of your fair household, Father-knight, 
Methinks you take small heed ! 
Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 
The solitude of Binnorie. 

Away the seven fair Campbells fly, 
And, over hill and hollow, 
With menace proud, and insult loud, 
The youthful Rovers follow. 
Cried they, " Your Father loves to roam 
Enough for him to find 
The empty house when he comes home ; 
For us your yellow ringlets comb, 
For us be fair and kind ! " 
Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 
The solitude of Binnorie. 

Some close behind, some side by side, 
Like clouds in stormy weather ; 
They run, and cry, " Nay, let us die, 
And let us die together." 
A lake was near ; the shore was steep 
There never foot had been ; 
They ran, and with a desperate leap 
Together plunged into the deep, 
Nor ever more were seen. 
Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 
The solitude of Binnorie. 

The stream that flows out of the lake, 
As through the glen it rambles, 
Repeats a moan o'er moss and stone, 
For those seven lovely Campbells. 
Seven little Islands, green and bare • 
Have risen from out the deep : 
The fishers say, those sisters fair, 
By faeries all are buried there, 
And there together sleep. 
Sing, mournfully, oh ! mournfully, 
The solitude of Binnorie. 

Who fancied what a pretty sight 
This Rock would be if edged around 
With living snow-drops ? circlet bright ! 
How glorious to this orchard-ground ! 
Who loved the little Rock, and set 
Upon its head this coronet ? 
Was it the humour of a child \ 
Or rather of some gentle maid, 
Whose brows, the day that she was styled 
The shepherd-queen, were thus arrayed ? 
Of man mature, or matron sage ? 
Or old man toying with his age ! 
I asked — 'twas whispered ; The device 
To each and all might well belong : 
Tt is the Spirit of Paradise 
That prompts such work, a Spirit strong, 
That gives to all the self-same bent 
Where life is wise and innocent. 

REDBREAST CHASING THE BUTTERFLY. 
Art thou the bird whom Man loves best, 
The pious bird with the scarlet breast, 
Our little English Robin ; 
The bird that comes about our doors 
When Autumn-winds are sobbing ? 
Art thou the Peter of Norway Boors ? 
Their Thomas in Finland, 
And Russia far inland \ 
The bird, that by some name or other 
All men who know thee call then" brother, 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

The darling of children and men ? 
Could Father Adam open his eyes 
And see this sight beneath the skies, 
He 'd wish to close them again. 
— If the Butterfly knew but his friend. 
Hither Ms flight he woidd bend ; 
And find his way to me, 
Under the branches of the tree : 
In and out, he darts about ; 
Can this be the bird, to man so good, 
That, after their bewildering, 
Covered with leaves the little children, 
So painfully in the wood ? 
What ailed thee, Robin, that thou could'st pursue 
A beautiful creature, 
That is gentle by nature ? 
Beneath the summer sky 
From flower to flower let him fly ; 
'Tis all that he wishes to do. 
The cheerer Thou of our in-door sadness, 
He is the friend of our summer gladness : 
What hinders, then, that ye should be 
Playmates in the sunny weather, 
And fly about in the air together ! 
His beautiful wings in crimson are drest, 
A crimson as bright as thine own : 
Would'st thou be happy in thy nest, 
O pious Bird ! whom man loves best, 
Love him, or leave him alone ! 
. 

SONG FOR THE SPINNING WHEEL. 
FOUNDED UPON A BELIEF PREVALENT AMONG THE PASTORAX, 
VALES OF WESTMORELAND. 
Swiftly turn the murmuring wheel ! 
Night has brought the welcome hour, 
When the weary fingers feel 
Help, as if from faery power ; 
Dewy night o'ershades the ground ; 
Turn the swift wheel round and round ! 
Now, beneath the starry sky, 
Couch the widely-scattered sheep ; — 
Ply the pleasant labour, ply ! 
For the spindle, while they sleep, 
Runs with speed more smooth and fine, 
Gathering up a trustier line. 

 See Paradise Lost, Book XI., where Adam points out 
to Eve the ominous sign of the Eagle chasing < two Birds 
of gayest plume,' and the gentle Hart and Hind pursued 
by their enemy. 

Short-lived likings may be bred 
By a glance from fickle eyes ; 
But true love is like the thread 
Which the kindly wool supplies, 
When the flocks are all at rest 
Sleeping on the mountain's breast. 

XVII, 
HINT FROM THE MOUNTAINS 
FOR CERTAIN POLITICAL PRETENDERS. 
" Who but hails the sight with pleasure 
When the wings of genius rise, 
Their ability to measure 
With great enterprise ; 
But in man was ne'er such daring 
As yon Hawk exhibits, pairing 
His brave spirit with the war in 
The stormy skies ! 
Mark him, how his power he uses, 
Lays it by, at will resumes ! 
Mark, ere for his haunt he chooses 
Clouds and utter glooms ! 
There, he wheels in downward mazes ; 
Sunward now his flight he raises, 
Catches fire, as seems, and blazes 
With uninjured plumes !" — 
ANSWER. 
" Stranger, 'tis no act of courage 
Which aloft thou dost discern ; 
No bold bird gone forth to forage 
'Mid the tempest stern ; 
But such mockery as the nations 
See, when public perturbations 
Lift men from their native stations, 
Like yon Tuft of fern ; 
Such it is ; the aspiring creature 
Soaring on undaunted wing, 
(So you fancied) is by nature 
A dull helpless thing, 
Dry and withered, light and yellow ; — 
That to be the tempest's fellow ! 
Wait — and you shall see how hollow 
Its endeavouring !" 
. 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

xvm. 
ON SEEING A NEEDLECASE IN THE 
FORM OF A HARP. 
THE WORK OF K.M.S. 
Frowns are on every MuseVface, 
Reproaches from their lips are sent, 
That mimicry should thus disgrace 
The noble Instrument. 
A very Harp in all but size ! 
Needles for strings in apt gradation ! 
Minerva's self would stigmatize 
The unclassic profanation. 
Even her own needle that subdued 
Arachne's rival spirit, 
Though wrought in Vulcan's happiest mood, 
Such honour could not merit. 
And this, too, from the Laureate's Child, 
A living lord of melody ! 
How will her Sire be reconciled 
To the refined indignity \ 
I spake, when whispered a low voice, 
" Bard ! moderate your ire ; 
Spirits of all degrees rejoice 
In presence of the lyre. 
The Minstrels of Pygmean bands, 
Dwarf Genii, moonlight-loving Fays, 
Have shells to fit their tiny hands 
And suit their slender lays. 
Some, still more delicate of ear, 
Have lutes (believe my words) 
Whose framework is of gossamer, 
While sunbeams are the chords. 
Gay Sylphs this miniature will court, 
Made vocal by then- brushing wings, 
And sullen Gnomes will learn to sport 
Around its polished strings ; 
Whence strains to love-sick maiden dear, 
While in her lonely bower she tries 
To cheat the thought she cannot cheer, 
By fanciful embroideries. 
Trust, angry Bard ! a knowing Sprite, 
Nor think, the Harp her lot deplores ; 
Though 'mid the stars the Lyre shine bright, 
Love stoops as fondly as he soars." 
. 

TO A LADY, 
IN ANSWER TO A REQUEST THAT I WOULD WRITE HER A 
POEM UPON SOME DRAWINGS THAT SHE HAD MADE OF 
FLOWERS IN THE ISLAND OF MADEIRA. 
Faie Lady ! can I sing of flowers 
That in Madeira bloom and fade, 
I who ne'er sate -within their bowers, 
Nor through their sunny lawns have strayed \ 
How they in sprightly dance are worn 
By Shepherd-groom or May-day queen, 
Or holy festal pomps adorn, 
These eyes have never seen. 
Yet tho' to me the pencil's art 
No like remembrances can give, 
Your portraits still may reach the heart 
And there for gentle pleasure live ; 
While Fancy ranging with free scope 
Shall on some lovely Alien set 
A name with us endeared to hope, 
To peace, or fond regret. 
Still as we look with nicer care, 
Some new resemblance we may trace : 
A Hearth-ease will perhaps be there, 
A Speedwell may not want its place. 
And so may we, with charmed mind 
Beholding what your skill has wrought, 
Another Star-of-Betldeliem find, 
A new Forget-me-not. 
From earth to heaven with motion fleet 
From heaven to earth our thoughts will pass, 
A Holy-thistle here we meet 
And there a Shepherd's weather-glass; 
And haply some familiar name 
Shall grace the fairest, sweetest, plant 
Whose presence cheers the drooping frame 
Of English Emigrant. 
Gazing she feels its power beguile 
Sad thoughts, and breathes with easier breath ; 
Alas ! that meek that tender smile 
Is but a harbinger of death : 
And pointing with a feeble hand 
She says, in faint words by sighs broken, 
Bear for me to my native land 
This precious Flower, true love's last token. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

Glad sight wherever new with old 
Is joined through some dear homehorn tie ; 
The life of all that we behold 
Depends upon that mystery. 
Vain is the glory of the sky, 
The beauty vain of field and grove 
Unless, while with admiring eye 
We gaze, we also learn to love. 

THE CONTRAST. 
THE PARROT AND THE WREN. 
I. 
Within her gilded cage confined, 
I saw a dazzling Belle, 
A Parrot of that famous kind 
Whose name is Non-pareil. 
Like beads of glossy jet her eyes ; 
And, smoothed by Nature's skill, 
With pearl or gleaming agate vies 
Her finely-curved bill. 
Her plumy mantle's living hues 
In mass opposed to mass, 
Outshine the splendour that imbues 
The robes of pictured glass. 
And, sooth to say, an apter Mate 
Did never tempt the choice 
Of feathered Thing most delicate 
In figure and in voice. 
But, exiled from Australian bowers, 
And singleness her lot, 
She trills her song with tutored powers, 
Or mocks each casual note. 
No more of pity for regrets 
With which she may have striven ! 
Now but in wantonness she frets, 
Or spite, if cause be given ; 
Arch, volatile, a sportive bird 
By social glee inspired ; 
Ambitious to be seen or heard, 
And pleased to be admired ! 

This moss-lined shed, green, soft, and dry, 
Harbours a self-contented Wren, 
Not shunning man's abode, though shy, 
Almost as thought itself, of human ken. 
Strange places, coverts unendeared, 
She never tried ; the very nest 
In which this Child of Spring was reared, 
Is warmed, thro' winter, by her feathery breast. 
To the bleak winds she sometimes gives 
A slender unexpected strain ; 
Proof that the hermitess still lives, 
Though she appear not, and be sought in vain. 
Say, Dora ! tell me, by yon placid moon, 
If called to choose between the favoured pair, 
Which would you be, — the bird of the saloon, 
By lady-fingers tended with nice care, 
Caressed, applauded, upon dainties fed, 
Or Nature's Darkling of this mossy shed  
. 

THE DANISH BOY. 

A FRAGMENT. 

Between two sister moorland rills 
There is a spot that seems to lie 
Sacred to flowerets of the hills, 
And sacred to the sky. 
And in this smooth and open dell 
There is a tempest-stricken tree ; 
A corner-stone by lightning cut, 
The last stone of a lonely hut ; 
And in this dell you see 
A thing no storm can e'er destroy, 
The shadow of a Danish Boy. 

In clouds above, the lark is heard, 
But drops not here to earth for rest ; 
Within this lonesome nook the bird 
Did never build her nest. 
No beast, no bird hath here his home ; 
Bees, wafted on the breezy air, 
Pass high above those fragrant bells 
To other flowers : — to other dells 
Their burthens do they bear ; 
The Danish Boy walks here alone : 
The lovely dell is all his own. 


POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

 

A Spirit of noon-day is he ; 
Yet seems a form of flesh and blood; 
Nor piping shepherd shall he be, 
Nor herd-boy of the wood. 
A regal vest of fur he wears, 
In colour like a raven's wing; 
It fears not rain, nor wind, nor dew ; 
But in the storm tis fresh and blue 
As budding pines in spring ; 
His helmet has a vernal grace, 
Fresh as the bloom upon his face. 

A harp is from his shoulder slung ; 
Resting the harp upon his knee ; 
To words of a forgotten tongue, 
He suits its melody. 
Of flocks upon the neighbouring hill 
He is the darling and the joy ; 
And often, when no cause appears, 
The mountain-ponies prick their ears, 
— They hear the Danish Boy, 
While in the dell he sings alone 
Beside the tree and corner-stone. 

There sits he ; in his face you spy 
No trace of a ferocious air, 
Nor ever was a cloudless sky 
So steady or so fair. 
The lovely Danish Boy is blest 
And happy in his flowery cove : 
From bloody deeds his thoughts are far; 
And yet he warbles songs of war, 
That seem like songs of love, 
For calm and gentle is his mien ; 
Like a dead Boy he is serene. 

XXIII. 
SONG 
FOR THE WANDERING JEW. 
Though the torrents from their fountains 
Roar down many a craggy steep, 
Yet they find among the mountains 
Resting-places calm and deep. 
Clouds that love through air to hasten, 
Ere the storm its fury stills, 
Helmet-like thdmselves will fasten 
On the heads of towering hills. 

What, if through the frozen centre 
Of the Alps the Chamois bound, 
Yet he has a home to enter 
In some nook of chosen ground : 
And the Sea-horse, though the ocean 
Yield him no domestic cave, 
Slumbers without sense of motion, 
Couched upon the rocking wave. 
If on windy days the Raven 
Gambol like a dancing skiff, 
Not the less she loves her haven 
In the bosom of the cliff. 
The fleet Ostrich, till day closes, 
Vagrant over desert sands, 
Brooding on her eggs reposes 
When chill night that care demands. 
Day and night my toils redouble, 
Never nearer to the goal ; 
Night and day, I feel the trouble 
Of the Wanderer in my soul. 

XXIV. 
STRAY PLEASURES. 
■ Pleasure is spread through the earth 
In stray gifts to he claimed, by whoever shall find.' 
By their floating mill, 
That lies dead and still, 
Behold yon Prisoners three, 
The Miller with two Dames, on the breast of the 
Thames ! 
The platform is small, but gives room for them all ; 
And they 're dancing merrily. 
From the shore come the notes 
To their mill where it floats, 
To their house and their mill tethered fast : 
To the small wooden isle where, their work to 
beguile, 
They from morning to even take whatever is given ; — 
And many a blithe day they have past. 
In sight of the spires, 
All alive with the fires 
Of the sun going down to his rest, 
In the broad open eye of the solitary sky, 
They dance, — there are three, as jocund as free, 
While they dance on the calm river's breast. 

G 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

Man and Maidens wheel, 
They themselves make the reel, 
And their music 's a prey which they seize ; 
It plays not for them, — what matter ? 'tis theirs ; 
And if they had care, it has scattered their cares, 
While they dance, crying, "Long as ye please ! " 
They dance not for me, 
Yet mine is their glee ! 
Thus pleasure is spread through the earth 
In sti'ay gifts to be claimed by whoever shall find ; 
Thus a rich loving-kindness, redundantly kind, 
Moves all nature to gladness and mirth. 
The showers of the spring 
Rouse the birds, and they sing ; 
If the wind do but stir for his proper delight, 
Each leaf, that and this, his neighbour will kiss ; 
Each wave, one and t' other, speeds after his brother : 
They are happy, for that is their right ! 
. 

THE PILGRIM'S DREAM; 
OR, THR STAR AND THE GLOW-WORM. 
A Pilgrim, when the summer day 
Had closed upon his weary way, 
A lodging begged beneath a castle's roof ; 
But him the haughty Warder spurned ; 
And from the gate the Pilgrim turned, 
To seek such covert as the field 
Or heath-besprinkled copse might yield, 
Or lofty wood, shower-proof. 
He paced along ; and, pensively, 
Halting beneath a shady tree, 
Whose moss-grown root might serve for couch or 
seat, 
Fixed on a Star his upward eye ; 
Then, from the tenant of the sky 
He turned, and watched with kindred look, 
A Glow-worm, in a dusky nook, 
Apparent at his feet.' 
The murmur of a neighbouring stream 
Induced a soft and slumbrous dream, 
A pregnant dream, within whose shadowy bounds 
He recognised the earth-born Star, 
And Tliat which glittered from afar ; 
And (strange to witness !) from the frame 
Of the ethereal Orb, there came 
Intelligible sounds. 

Much did it taunt the humble Light 
That now, when day was fled, and night 
Hushed the dark earth, fast closing weary eyes, 
A very reptile could presume 
To show her taper in the gloom, 
As if in rivalship with One 
Who sate a ruler on his throne 
Erected in the skies. 
" Exalted Star !" the Worm replied, 
" Abate this unbecoming pride, 
Or with a less uneasy lustre shine ; 
Thou shrink'st as momently thy rays 
Are mastered by the breathing haze ; 
While neither mist, nor thickest cloud 
That shapes in heaven its murky shroud, 
Hath power to injure mine. 
But not for this do I aspire 
To match the spark of local fire, 
That at my will burns on the dewy lawn, 
With thy acknowledged glories ; — No ! 
Yet, thus upbraided, I may show 
What favours do attend me here, 
Till, like thyself, I disappear 
Before the purple dawn." 
When this in modest guise was said, 
Across the welkin seemed to spread 
A boding sound — for aught but sleep unfit ! 
Hills quaked, the rivers backward ran ; 
That Star, so proud  late, looked wan ; 
And reeled with visionary stir 
In the blue depth, like Lucifer 
Cast headlong to the pit ! 
Fire raged : and, when the spangled floor 
Of ancient ether was no more, 
New heavens succeeded, by the dream brought fort 
And all the happy Souls that rode 
Transfigured through that fresh abode, 
Had heretofore, in humble trust, 
Shone meekly mid their native dust, 
The Glow-worms of the earth ! 
This knowledge, from an Angel's voice 
Proceeding, made the heart rejoice 
Of Him who slept upon the open lea : 
Waking at morn he murmured not ; 
And, till life's journey closed, the spot 
Was to the Pilgrim's soul endeared, 
Where by that dream he had been cheered 
Beneath the shady tree. 



— — . 
POEMS OF THE FANCY.  
i 


These find, 'mid ivied abbey-walls, 

XXVI. 

A canopy in some still nook ; 

THE 

Others are pent-housed by a brae 


That overhangs a brook. 

POET AND THE CAGED TURTLEDOVE. 


As often as I murmur here 

There to the brooding bird her mate 

My half-formed melodies, 

Warbles by fits his low clear song ; 

Straight from her osier mansion near, 

And by the busy streamlet both 

The Turtledove replies : 

Are sung to all day long. 

Though silent as a leaf before, 


The captive promptly coos ; 

Or in sequestered lanes they build, 

Is it to teach her own soft lore, 

Where, till the flitting bird's return, 

Or second my weak Muse ? 

Her eggs within the nest repose, 


Like relics in an urn. 

I rather think, the gentle Dove 


Is murmuring a reproof, 

But still, where general choice is good, 

Displeased that I from lays of love 

There is a better and a best ; 

Have dared to keep aloof; 

And, among fairest objects, some 

That I, a Bard of hill and dale, 

Are fairer than the rest ; 

Have caroll'd, fancy free, 


As if nor dove nor nightingale, 

This, one of those small builders proved 

Had heart or voice for me. 

In a green covert, where, from out 


The forehead of a pollard oak, 

If such thy meaning, forbear, 
Sweet Bird ! to do me wrong ; 


The leafy antlers sprout ; 

Love, blessed Love, is every where 
The spirit of my song : 
'Mid grove, and by the calm fireside, 


For She who planned the mossy lodge, 
Mistrusting her evasive skill, 


Had to a Primrose looked for aid 

Love animates my lyre — 


Her wishes to fulfil. 

That coo again ! — 't is not to chide, 


I feel, but to inspire. 


. 

High on the trunk's projecting brow, 


And fixed an infant's span above 
The budding flowers, peeped forth the nest 


XXVII. 

The prettiest of the grove ! 

A WREN'S NEST. 

The treasure proudly did I show 

Among the dwellings framed by birds 

To some whose minds without disdain 

In field or forest with nice care, 

Can turn to little things ; but once 

Is none that with the little Wren's 

Looked up for it in vain : 

In snugness may compare. 



'Tis gone — a ruthless spoiler's prey, 

No door the tenement requires, 

Who heeds not beauty, love, or song, 

And seldom needs a laboured roof ; 

'Tis gone ! (so seemed it) and we grieved 

Yet is it to the fiercest sun 

Indignant at the wrong. 

Impervious, and storm-proof. 


So warm, so beautiful withal, 
In perfect fitness for its aim, 

Just three days after, passing by 
In clearer light the moss-built cell 

I saw, espied its shaded mouth ; 
And felt that all was well. 

That to the Kind by special grace 

Their instinct surely came. 


And when for their abodes they seek 

The Primrose for a veil had spread 

An opportune recess, 

The largest of her upright leaves ; 

The hermit has no finer eye 

And thus, for purposes benign, 

For shadowy quietness. 

A simple flower deceives. 



 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

Concealed from friends who might disturb 
Thy quiet with no ill intent, 
Secure from evil eyes and hands 
Ou barbarous plunder bent, 
Rest, Mother-bird ! and when thy young 
Take flight, and thou art free to roam, 
When withered is the guardian Flower, 
And empty thy late home, 
Think how ye prospered, thou and thine, 
Amid the unviolated grove 
Housed near the growing Primrose-tuft 
In foresight, or in love. 

LOVE LIES BLEEDING. 
You call it, " Love lies bleeding," — so you may, 
Though the ied Flower, not prostrate, only droops, 
As we have seen it here from day to day, 
From month to month, life passing not away : 
A flower how rich in sadness ! Even thus stoops, 
(Sentient by Grecian sculpture's marvellous power) 
Thus leans, with hanging brow and body bent 
Earthward in uncomplaining languishment, 
The dying Gladiator. So, sad Flower ! 
('Tis Fancy guides me willing to be led, 
Though by a slender thread,) 
So drooped Adonis bathed hi sanguine dew 
Of his death-wound, when he from innocent air 
The gentlest breath of resignation drew ; 
While Venus in a passion of despair 
Rent, weeping over him, her golden hah 
Spangled with drops of that celestial shower. 
She suffered, as Immortals sometimes do ; 
But pangs more lasting far, that Lover knew 
Who first, weighed down by scorn, in some lone 
bower 
Did press this semblance of unpitied smart 
Into the service of his constant heart, 
His own dejection, downcast Flower ! could share 
With thine, and gave the mournful name which 
thou wilt ever bear. 

XXIX. 
COMPANION TO THE FOREGOING. 
Never enlivened with the liveliest ray 
That fosters growth or checks or cheers decay, 
Nor by the heaviest rain-drops more deprest, 
This Flower, that first appeared as summer's guest, 

Preserves her beauty mid autumnal leaves 
And to her mournful habits fondly cleaves. 
When files of stateliest plants have ceased to bloor 
One after one submitting to their doom, 
When her coevals each and all are fled, 
What keeps her thus reclined upon her loneson 
bed? 
The old mythologists, more impress'd than we 
Of this late day by character in tree 
Or herb, that claimed peculiar sympathy, 
Or by the silent lapse of fountain clear, 
Or with the language of the viewless air 
By bird or beast made vocal, sought a cause 
To solve the mystery, not in Nature's laws 
But in Man's fortunes. Hence a thousand tales 
Sung to the plaintive lyre in Grecian vales. 
Nor doubt that something of their spirit swayed 
The fancy-stricken Youth or heart-sick Maid, 
Who, while each stood companionless and eyed 
This undeparting Flower in crimson dyed, 
Thought of a wound which death is slow to cure, 
A fate that has endured and will endure, 
And, patience coveting yet passion feeding, 
Called the dejected Lingerer, Love lies bleeding. 

RURAL ILLUSIONS. 

Sylph was it ? or a Bird more bright 
Than those of fabulous stock ? 
A second darted by ; — and lo ! 
Another of the flock, 
Through sunshine flitting from the bough 
To nestle in the rock. 
Transient deception ! a gay freak 
Of April's mimicries ! 
Those brilliant strangers, hailed with joy 
Among the budding trees, 
Proved last year's leaves, pushed from the spray 
To frolic on the breeze. 

Maternal Flora ! show thy face, 
And let thy hand be seen, 
Thy hand here sprinkling tiny flowers, 
That, as they touch the green, 
Take root (so seems it) and look up 
In honour of their Queen. 
Yet, sooth, those little starry specks, 
That not in vain aspired 


POEJMS OF THE FANCY.  

To be confounded with live growths, 

Now she works with three or four, 

Most dainty, most admired, 

Like an Indian conjurer ; 

Were only blossoms dropped from twigs 

Quick as he in feats of art, 

Of their own offspring tired. 

Far beyond in joy of heart. 


Were her antics played in the eye 

Not such the World's illusive shows ; 

Of a thousand standers-by, 

Her wingless flutterings, 

Clapping hands with shout and stare, 

Her blossoms which, though shed, outbrave 

What would little Tabby care 

The floweret as it springs, 

For the plaudits of the crowd ? 

For the undeceived, smile as they may, 

Over happy to be proud, 

Are melancholy things : 

Over wealthy in the treasure 

But gentle Nature plays her part 

Of her own exceeding pleasure ! 

With ever-varying wiles, 
And transient feignings with plain truth 

'Tis a pretty baby-treat ; 
Nor, I deem, for me unmeet ; 

So well she reconciles, 



Here, for neither Babe nor me, 

That those fond Idlers most are pleased 

Other play-mate can I see. 
Of the countless living things, 

Whom oftenest she beguiles. 
. 


That with stir of feet and wings 


(In the sun or under shade, 
Upon bough or grassy blade) 



And with busy revellmgs, 


Chirp and song, and murmurings, 

XXXI. 

Made this orchard's narrow space, 


And this vale so blithe a place ; 

THE KITTEN AND FALLING LEAVES. 


Multitudes are swept away 

That way look, my Infant, lo ! 

Never more to breathe the day : 

What a pretty baby-show ! 

Some are sleeping ; some in bands 

See the Kitten on the wall, 

Travelled into distant lands ; 

Sporting with the leaves that fall, 

Others slunk to moor and wood, 

Withered leaves — one — two — and three — 

Far from human neighbourhood ; 

From the lofty elder-tree ! 

And, among the Kinds that keep 

Through the calm and frosty ah' 

With us closer fellowship, 

Of this morning bright and fair, 

With us openly abide, 

Eddying round and round they sink 

All have laid their mirth aside. 

Softly, slowly: one might think, 


From the motions that are made, 

Where is he that giddy Sprite, 

Every little leaf conveyed 

Blue-cap, with his colours bright, 

Sylph or Faery hither tending, — 

Who was blest as bird could be, 

To this lower world descending, 

Feeding in the apple-tree ; 

Each invisible and mute, 

Made such wanton spoil and rout, 

In his wavering parachute. 

Turning blossoms inside out ; 

But the Kitten, how she starts, 

Hung — head pointing towards the ground — 

Crouches, stretches, paws, and darts ! 

Fluttered, perched, into a round 

First at one, and then its fellow 

Bound himself, and then unbound ; 

Just as light and just as yellow ; 

Lithest, gaudiest Harlecpiin ! 

There are many now — now one — 

Prettiest Tumbler ever seen ! 

Now they stop and there are none : 

Light of heart and light of limb ; 

What intenseness of desire 

What is now become of Him ? 

In her upward eye of fire ! 

Lambs, that through the mountains went 

With a tiger-leap half way 

Frisking, bleating merriment, 

Now she meets the coming prey, 

When the year was in its prime, 

Lets it go as fast, and then 

They are sobered by this time. 

Has it in her power again : 

If you look to vale or hill, 
 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

If you listen, all is still, 
Save a little neighbouring rill, 
That from out the rocky ground 
Strikes a solitary sound. 
Vainly glitter hill and plain. 
And the air is calm in vain ; 
Vainly Morning spreads the lure 
Of a sky serene and pure ; 
Creature none can she decoy 
Into open sign of joy : 
Is it that they have a fear 
Of the dreary season near % 
Or that other pleasures be 
Sweeter even than gaiety ? 
Yet, whate'er enjoyments dwell 
In the impenetrable cell 
Of the silent heart which Nature 
Furnishes to every creature ; 
Whatsoe'er we feel and know 
Too sedate for outward show, 
Such a light of gladness breaks, 
Pretty Kitten! from thy freaks,— 
Spreads with such a living grace 
O'er my little Laura's face ; 
Yes, the sight so stirs and charms 
Thee, Baby, laughing in my arms, 
That almost I could repine 
That your transports are not mine, 
That I do not wholly fare 
Even as ye do, thoughtless pair ! 
And I will have my careless season 
Spite of melancholy reason, 
Will walk through life in such a way 
That, when time brings on decay, 
Now and then I may possess 
Hours of perfect gladsomeness. 
— Pleased by any random toy ; 
By a kitten's busy joy, 
Or an infant's laughing eye 
Sharing in the ecstasy ; 
I would fare like that or this, 
Find my wisdom in my bliss ; 
Keep the sprightly soul awake, 
And have faculties to take, 
Even from things by sorrow wrought, 
Matter for a jocund thought, 
Spite of care, and spite of grief, 
To gambol with Life's falling Leaf. 

xxxn. 
ADDRESS TO MY INFANT DAUGHTER, 
DORA, 
ON BEING REMINDED THAT SHE WAS A MONTH OLD THAT 
DAY, SEPTEMBER . 
Hast thou then survived — 

Mild Offspring of infirm humanity, 
Meek Infant ! among all forlornest things 
The most forlorn — one life of that bright star, 
The second glory of the Heavens ? — Thou hast ; 
Already hast survived that great decay, 
That transformation through the wide earth felt, 
And by all nations. In that Being's sight 
From whom the Race of human kind proceed, 
A thousand years are but as yesterday ; 
And one day's narrow circuit is to Him 
Not less capacious than a thousand years. 
But what is time  What outward glory % neithe 
A measure is of Thee, whose claims extend 
Through 'heaven's eternal year.' — Yet hail to The 
Frail, feeble, Monthling !— by that name, met! 
Thy scanty breathing-time is portioned out 
Not idly. — Hadst thou been of Indian birth, 
Couched on a casual bed of moss and leaves, 
And rudely canopied by leafy boughs, 
Or to the churlish elements exposed 
On the blank plains, — the coldness of the night, 
Or the night's darkness, or its cheerful face 
Of beauty, by the changing moon adorned, 
Would, with imperious admonition, then 
Have scored thine age, and punctually timed 
Thine infant history, on the minds of those 
Who might have wandered with thee. — Mother 
love, 
Nor less than mother's love in other breasts, 
Will, among us warm- clad and warmly housed, 
Do for thee what the finger of the heavens 
Doth all too often harshly execute 
For thy unblest coevals, amid wilds 
Where fancy hath small liberty to grace 
The affections, to exalt them or refine ; 
And the maternal sympathy itself, 
Though strong, is, in the main, a joyless tie 
Of naked instinct, wound about the heart. 
Happier, far happier is thy lot and ours ! 
Even now — to solemnise thy helpless state, 
And to enliven in the mind's regard 
Thy passive beauty — parallels have risen, 
Resemblances, or contrasts, that connect, 
Within the region of a father's thoughts, 
Thee and thy mate and sister of the sky. 
And first ; — thy sinless progress, through a world 
By sorrow darkened and by care disturbed, 
Apt likeness bears to hers, through gathered clouds, 

THE WAGGONER. 

 

: Moving untouched in silver purity, 
I And cheering oft-times their reluctant gloom. 
Fair are ye both, and both are free from stain : 
( But thou, how leisurely thou fill'st thy horn 
With brightness ! leaving her to post along, 
j And range about, disquieted in change, 
And still impatient of the shape she wears. 
Once up, once down the hill, one journey, Babe 
That will suffice thee ; and it seems that now 
! Thou hast fore-knowledge that such task is thine : 
Thou travellest so contentedly, and sleep'st 
In such a heedless peace. Alas ! full soon 
'■ Hath this conception, grateful to behold, 
Changed countenance, like an object sullied o'er 
By breathing mist; and thine appears to be 

A mournful labour, while to her is given 
Hope, and a renovation without end. 
— That smile forbids the thought; for on thy face 
Smiles are beginning, like the beams of dawn, 
To shoot and circulate ; smiles have there been seen ; 
Tranquil assurances that Heaven supports 
The feeble motions of thy life, and cheers 
Thy loneliness : or shall those smiles be called 
Feelers of love, put forth as if to explore 
This untried world, and to prepare thy way 
Through a strait passage intricate and dim ? 
Such are they; and the same are tokens, signs, 
Which, when the appointed season hath arrived, 
Joy, as her holiest language, shall adopt ; 
And Reason's godlike Power be proud to own. 
. 

XXXIII. 
THE WAGGONER. 
In Cairo's crowded streets 
The impatient Merchant, wondering, waits in vain, 
And Mecca saddens at the long delay. 
Thomson. 

CHARLES LAMB, ESQ,. 
My Dear Friend, 
When I sent you, a few weeks ago, the Tale of Peter Bell, you asked ' why The Waggoner was not added ? ' 
— To say the truth, — from the higher tone of imagination, and the deeper touches of passion aimed at in the former, I 
apprehended, this little Piece could not accompany it without disadvantage. In the year , if I am not mistaken, 
The Waggoner was read to you in manuscript, and, as you have rememhered it for so long a time, I am the more 
encouraged to hope, that, since the localities on which the Poem partly depends did not prevent its being interesting 
to you, it may prove acceptable to others. Being therefore in some measure the cause of its present appearance, you 
must allow me the gratification of inscribing it to you ; in acknowledgment of the pleasure I have derived from your 
Writings, and of the high esteem with which I am very truly yours, 
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH. 
Rydal Mount, May , . 

CANTO FIRST. 
'Tis spent — this burning day of June ! 
Soft darkness o'er its latest gleams is stealing ; 
The buzzing dor-hawk, round and round, is wheel- 
ing,— 
That solitary bird 
Is all that can be heard 
In silence deeper far than that of deepest noon ! 
Confiding Glow-worms, 'tis a night 
Propitious to your earth-bom light ! 
But, where the scattered stars are seen 
In hazy straits the clouds between, 
Each, in his station twinkling not, 
Seems changed into a pallid spot. 
The mountains against heaven's grave weight 
Rise up, and grow to wondrous height. 

The air, as in a lion's den, 
Is close and hot ; — and now and then 
Comes a tired and sultry breeze 
With a haunting and a panting, 
Like the stifling of disease ; 
But the dews allay the heat, 
And the silence makes it sweet. 
Hush, there is some one on the stir ! 
'Tis Benjamin the Waggoner ; 
Who long hath trod this toilsome way, 
Companion of the night and day. 
That far-off tinkling's drowsy cheer, 
Mix'd with a faint yet grating sound 
In a moment lost and found, 
The Wain announces — by whose side 
Along the banks of Rydal Mere 
He paces on, a trusty Guide, — 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

Listen ! you can scarcely hear ! 
Hither he his course is bending ; — 
Now he leaves the lower ground, 
And up the craggy hill ascending 
Many a stop and stay he makes, 
Many a breathing-fit he takes ; — 
Steep the way and wearisome, 
Yet all the while his whip is dumb ! 
The Horses have worked with right good-will, 
And so have gained the top of the hill ; 
He was patient, they were strong, 
And now they smoothly glide along, 
Recovering breath, and pleased to win 
The praises of mild Benjamin. 
Heaven shield him from mishap and snare ! 
But why so early with this prayer ? — 
Is it for threatenings in the sky ? 
Or for some other danger nigh ? 
No ; none is near him yet, though he 
Be one of much infirmity ; 
For at the bottom of the brow, 
Where once the Dove and Olive-bough 
Offered a greeting of good ale 
To all who entered Grasmere Vale ; 
And called on him who must depart 
To leave it with a jovial heart ; 
There, where the Dove and Olive-bough 
Once hung, a Poet harbours now, 
A simple water-drinking Bard ; 
Why need our Hero then (though frail 
His best resolves) be on his guard ? 
He marches by, secure and bold ; 
Yet while he thinks on times of old, 
It seems that all looks wondrous cold ; 
He shrugs his shoulders, shakes his head, 
And, for the honest folk within, 
It is a doubt with Benjamin 
Whether they be alive or dead ! 
Here is no danger, — none at all ! 
Beyond his wish he walks secure ; 
But pass a mile — and then for trial, — 
Then for the pride of self-denial ; 
If he resist that tempting door, 
Which with such friendly voice will call ; 
If he resist those casement panes, 
And that bright gleam which thence will fall 
Upon his Leaders' bells and manes, 
Inviting him with cheerful lure : 
For still, though all be dark elsewhere, 
Some shining notice will be there, 
Of open house and ready fare. 

The place to Benjamin right well 
Is known, and by as strong a spell 
As used to be that sign of love 
And hope — the Olive-bough and Dove ; 
He knows it to his cost, good Man ! 
Who does not know the famous Swan ? 
Object uncouth ! and yet our boast, 
For it was painted by the Host ; 
His own conceit the figure planned, 
'Twas coloured all by his own hand ; 
And that frail Child of thirsty clay, 
Of whom I sing this rustic lay, 
Could tell with self-dissatisfaction 
Quaint stories of the bird's attraction ! 
Well ! that is past — and in despite 
Of open door and shining light. 
And now the conqueror essays 
The long ascent of Dunmail-raise ; 
And with his team is gentle here 
As when he clomb from Rydal Mere ; 
His whip they do not dread — his voice 
They only hear it to rejoice. 
To stand or go is at their pleasure ; 
Their efforts and their time they measure 
By generous pride within the breast ; 
And, while they strain, and while they rest, 
He thus pursues his thoughts at leisure. 
Now am I fairly safe to-night — 
And with proud cause my heart is light : 
I trespassed lately worse than ever — 
But Heaven has blest a good endeavour ; 
And, to my soul's content, I find 
The evil One is left behind. 
Yes, let my master fume and fret, 
Here am I — with my horses yet ! 
My jolly team, he finds that ye 
Will work for nobody but me ! 
Full proof of this the Country gained ; 
It knows how ye were vexed and strained, 
And forced unworthy stripes to bear, 
When trusted to another's care. 
Here was it — on this rugged slope, 
Which now ye climb with heart and hope. 
I saw you, between rage and fear, 
Plunge, and fling back a spiteful ear, 
And ever more and more confused, 
As ye were more and more abused : 
As chance would have it, passing by 
I saw you in that jeopardy : 

 This rude piece of self-taught art (such is the progress 
of refinement) has been supplanted by a professional pro- 
duction. 

THE WAGGONER. 

- 

A word from me was like a charm ; 
Ye pulled together with one mind ; 
And your huge burthen, safe from harm, 
Moved like a vessel in the wind ! 
— Yes, without me, up hills so high 
'Tis vain to strive for mastery. 
Then grieve not, jolly team ! though tough 
The road we travel, steep, and rough ; 
Though Rydal-heights and Dunmail-raise, 
And all their fellow banks and braes, 
Full often make you stretch and strain, 
And halt for breath and halt again, 
Yet to their sturdiness 'tis owing 
That side by side we still are going ! 
While Benjamin in earnest mood 
His meditations thus pursued, 
A storm, which had been smothered long, 
Was growing inwardly more strong ; 
And, in its struggles to get free, 
Was busily employed as he. 
The thunder had begun to growl- 
He heard not, too intent of soul ; 
The air was now without a breath — 
He marked not that 'twas still as death. 
But soon large rain-drops on his head 
Fell with the weight of drops of lead ; — 
He starts — and takes, at the admonition, 
A sage survey of his condition. 
The road is black before his eyes, 
Glimmering faintly where it lies ; 
Black is the sky — and every hill, 
Up to the sky, is blacker still — 
Sky, hill, and dale, one dismal room, 
Hung round and overhung with gloom ; 
Save that above a single height 
Is to be seen a lurid light, 
Above Helm-crag — a streak half dead, 
A burning of portentous red ; 
And near that lurid light, full well 
The Astrologer, sage Sidrophel, 
Where at his desk and book he sits, 
Puzzling aloft his curious wits ; 
He whose domain is held in common 
With no one but the ancient woman, 
Cowering beside her rifted cell, 
As if intent on magic spell ; — 
Dread pair, that, spite of wind and weather, 
Still sit upon Helm- crag together ! 

 A mountain of Grasmere, the broken summit of which 
presents two figures, full as distinctly shaped as that of the 
famous Cobbler near Arroquhar in Scotland. 

The Astrologer was not unseen 
By solitary Benjamin ; 
But total darkness came anon, 
And he and every thing was gone : 
And suddenly a ruffling breeze, 
(That would have rocked the sounding trees 
Had aught of sylvan growth been there) 
Swept through the Hollow long and bare : 
The rain rushed down — the road was battered, 
As with the force of billows shattered ; 
The horses are dismayed, nor know 
Whether they should stand or go ; 
And Benjamin is groping near them, 
Sees nothing, and can scarcely hear them. 
He is astounded, — wonder not, — 
With such a charge in such a spot ; 
Astounded in the mountain gap 
With thunder-peals, clap after clap, 
Close-treading on the silent flashes — 
And somewhere, as he thinks, by crashes 
Among the rocks ; with weight of rain, 
And sullen motions long and slow, 
That to a dreary distance go — 
Till, breaking in upon the dying strain, 
A rending o'er his head begins the fray again. 
Meanwhile, uncertain what to do, 
And oftentimes compelled to halt, 
The horses cautiously pursue 
Their way, without mishap or fault ; 
And now have reached that pile of stones, 
Heaped over brave King Dunmail's bones ; 
He who had once supreme command, 
Last king of rocky Cumberland ; 
His bones, and those of all his Power, 
Slain here in a disastrous hour ! 
When, passing through this narrow strait, 
Stony, and dark, and desolate, 
Benjamin can faintly hear 
A voice that comes from some one near, 
A female voice : — " Whoe'er you be, 
Stop," it exclaimed, (i and pity me " 
And, less in pity than in wonder, 
Amid the darkness and the thunder, 
The Waggoner, with prompt command, 
Summons his horses to a stand. 
While, with increasing agitation, 
The Woman urged her supplication, 
In rueful words, with sobs between — 
The voice of tears that fell unseen ; 
There came a flash — a startling glare, 
And all Seat-Sandal was laid bare ! 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

'Tis not a time for nice suggestion, 
And Benjamin, without a question, 
Taking her for some way-worn rover, 
Said, " Mount, and get you under cover !" 
Another voice, in tone as hoarse 
As a swoln brook with rugged course, 
Cried out, " Good brother, why so fast ? 
I 've had a glimpse of you — avast I 
Or, since it suits you to be civil, 
Take her at once — for good and evil !" 
w It is my Husband," softly said 
The Woman, as if half afraid : 
By this time she was snug within, 
Through help of honest Benjamin ; 
She and her Babe, which to her breast 
With thankfulness the Mother pressed ; 
And now the same strong voice more near 
Said cordially, " My Friend, what cheer ? 
Rough doings these ! as God's my judge, 
The sky owes somebody a grudge ! 
We 've had in half an hour or less 
A twelvemonth's terror and distress !" 
Then Benjamin entreats the Man 
Would mount, too, quickly as he can : 
The Sailor — Sailor now no more, 
But such he had been heretofore — 
To courteous Benjamin replied, 
" Go you your way, and mind not me ; 
For I must have, whate'er betide, 
My Ass and fifty things beside, — 
Go, and I ' follow speedily !" 
The Waggon moves — and with its load 
Descends along the sloping road ; 
And the rough Sailor instantly 
Turns to a little tent hard by : 
For when, at closing-in of day, 
The family had come that way, 
Green pasture and the soft warm air 
Tempted them to settle there. — 
Green is the grass for beast to graze, 
Around the stones of Dunmail-raise ! 
The Sailor gathers up his bed, 
Takes down the canvass overhead ; 
And, after farewell to the place, 
A parting word — though not of grace, 
Pursues, with Ass and all his store, 
The way the Waggon went before. 

CANTO SECOND. 
If Wytheburn's modest House of prayer, 
As lowly as the lowliest dwelling, 
Had, with its belfry's humble stock, 
A little pair that hang in air, 
Been mistress also of a clock, 
(And one, too, not in crazy plight) 
Twelve strokes that clock would have been telling 
Under the brow of old Helvellyn — 
Its bead-roll of midnight, 
Then, when the Hero of my tale 
Was passing by, and, down the vale 
(The vale now silent, hushed I ween 
As if a storm had never been) 
Proceeding with a mind at ease ; 
While the old Familiar of the seas 
Intent to use his utmost haste, 
Gained ground upon the Waggon fast, 
And gives another lusty cheer ; 
For spite of rumbling of the wheels, 
A welcome greeting he can hear ; — 
It is a fiddle in its glee 
Dinning from the Cherry Tree ! 
Thence the sound — the light is there— 
As Benjamin is now aware, 
Who, to his inward thoughts confined, 
Had almost reached the festive door, 
When, startled by the Sailor's roar, 
He hears a sound and sees the light, 
And in a moment calls to mind 
That 'tis the village Merry-night ! 
Although before in no dejection, 
At this insidious recollection 
His heart with sudden joy is filled, — 
His ears are by the music thrilled, 
His eyes take pleasure in the road 
Glittering before him bright and broad ; 
And Benjamin is wet and cold, 
And there are reasons manifold 
That make the good, tow'rds which he 's yearning, 
Look fairly like a lawful earning. 
Nor has thought time to come and go, 
To vibrate between yes and no ; 
For, cries the Sailor, " Glorious chance 
That blew us hither ! — let him dance, 
Who can or will ! — my honest soul, 
Our treat shall be a friendly bowl ! " 

 A term well known in the North of England, and 
applied to rural Festivals where young persons meet in 
the evening for the purpose of dancing. 

THE WAGGONER. 

 

He draws him to the door — " Come in, 
Come, come," cries he to Benjamin ! 
And Benjamin — ah, woe is me ! 
Gave the word — the horses heard 
And halted, though reluctantly. 
' Blithe souls and lightsome hearts have we, 
Feasting at the Cheery Tree !' 
This was the outside proclamation, 
This was the inside salutation ; 
What bustling— jostling— high and low ! 
A universal overflow ! 
i What tankards foaming from the tap ! 
' What store of cakes in every lap ! 
; What thumping — stumping — overhead ! 
The thunder had not been more busy : 
With such a stir you would have said, 
This little place may well be dizzy ! 
'Tis who can dance with greatest vigour — 
'Tis what can be most prompt and eager ; 
As if it heard the fiddle's call, 
The pewter clatters on the wall ; 
The very bacon shows it feeling, 
Swinging from the smoky ceiling ! 
A steaming bowl, a blazing fire, 
What greater good can heart desire ? 
'Twere worth a wise man's while to try 
The utmost anger of the sky : 
To seek for thoughts of a gloomy cast, 
If such the bright amends at last. 
Now should you say I judge amiss, 
The Cherry Tree shows proof of this ; 
For soon of all the happy there, 
Our Travellers are the happiest pair ; 
All care with Benjamin is gone — 
A Caesar past the Rubicon ! 
He thinks not of his long, long, strife ; — 
The Sailor, Man by nature gay, 
Hath no resolves to throw away ; 
And he hath now forgot his Wife, 
Hath quite forgotten her — or may be 
Thinks her the luckiest soul on earth, 
Within that warm and peaceful berth, 
Under cover, 
Terror over, 
Sleeping by her sleeping Baby. 
With bowl that sped from hand to hand, 
The gladdest of the gladsome band, 
Amid their own delight and fun, 
They hear— when every dance is done, 
When every whirling bout is o'er — 

The fiddle's squeak — that call to bliss, 
Ever followed by a kiss ; 
They envy not the happy lot, 
But enjoy their own the more ! 
While thus our jocund Travellers fare, 
Up springs the Sailor from his chair — 
Limps (for I might have told before 
That he was lame) across the floor- — 
Is gone — returns — and with a prize ; 
With what ? — a Ship of lusty size ; 
A gallant stately Man-of-war, 
Fixed on a smoothly-sliding car. 
Surprise to all, but most surprise 
To Benjamin, who rubs his eyes, 
Not knowing that he had befriended 
A Man so gloriously attended ! 
" This," cries the Sailor, " a Third-rate is — 
Stand back, and you shall see her gratis ! 
This was the Flag-ship at the Nile, 
The Vanguard — you may smirk and smile, 
But, pretty Maid, if you look near, 
You ' find you 've much in little here ! 
A nobler ship did never swim, 
And you shall see her in full trim : 
I'll set, my friends, to do you honour, 
Set every inch of sail upon her." 
So said, so done ; and masts, sails, yards, 
He names them all ; and interlards 
His speech with uncouth terms of art, 
Accomplished in the showman's part ; 
And then, as from a sudden check, 
Cries out — " 'Tis there, the quarter-deck 
On which brave Admiral Nelson stood — 
A sight that would have roused your blood ! 
One eye he had, which, bright as ten, 
Burned like a fire among his men ; 
Let this be land, and that be sea, 
Here lay the French — and thus came we ! " 
Hushed was by this the fiddle's sound, 
The dancers aU were gathered round, 
And, such the stillness of the house, 
You might have heard a nibbling mouse : 
While, borrowing helps where'er he may, 
The Sailor through the story runs 
Of ships to ships and guns to guns ; 
And does his utmost to display 
The dismal conflict, and the might 
And terror of that marvellous night ! 

 At the close of each strathspey, or jig, a particular 
note from the fiddle summons the Rustic to the agreeable 
duty of saluting liis partner. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

" A bowl, a bowl of double measure," 

Can any low-born care pursue her, 

Cries Benjamin, " a draught of length, 

Can any mortal clog come to her? 

To Nelson, England's pride and treasure, 

No notion have they — not a thought, 

Her bulwark and her tower of strength ! " 

That is from joyless regions brought ! 

When Benjamin had seized the bowl, 

And, while they coast the silent lake, 

The mastiff, from beneath the waggon, 

Then.' inspiration I partake ; . 

Where he lay, watchful as a dragon, 

Share their empyreal spirits — yea, 

Rattled his chain ; — 'twas all in vain, 

With their enraptured vision, see — 

For Benjamin, triumphant soul ! 

fancy — what a jubilee ! 

He heard the monitory growl ; 

What shifting pictures — clad in gleams 

Heard — and in opposition quaffed 

Of colour bright as feverish dreams ! 

A deep, determined, desperate draught ! 

Earth, spangled sky, and lake serene, 

Nor did the battered Tar forget, 

Involved and restless all — a scene 

Or flinch from what he deemed his debt : 

Pregnant with mutual exaltation, 

Then, like a hero crowned with laurel, 

Rich change, and multiplied creation ! 

Back to her place the ship he led ; 

This sight to me the Muse imparts ; — 

Wheeled her back in full apparel ; 

And then, what kindness in their hearts ! 

And so, flag flying at mast head, 

What tears of rapture, what vow-making, 

Re-yoked her to the Ass : — anon, 

Profound entreaties, and hand-shaking ! 

Cries Benjamin, " We must be gone." 

What solemn, vacant, interlacing, 

Thus, after two hours' hearty stay, 

As if they 'd fall asleep embracing ! 

Again behold them on their way ! 

Then, in the turbulence of glee, 


And in the excess of amity, 
Says Benjamin, " That Ass of thine, 



He spoils thy sport, and hinders mine : 

CANTO THIRD. 

If he were tethered to the waggon, 

Right gladly had the horses stirred, 

He 'd drag as well what he is dragging ; 

When they the wished-for greeting heard, 

And we, as brother should with brother 

The whip's loud notice from the door, 

Might trudge it alongside each other ! " 

That they were free to move once more. 


You think, those doings must have bred 

Forthwith, obedient to command, 

In them disheartening doubts and dread ; 

The horses made a quiet stand ; 

No, not a horse of all the eight, 

And to the waggon's skirts was tied 

Although it be a moonless night, 

The Creature, by the Mastiff's side, 

Fears either for himself or freight ; 

The Mastiff wondering, and perplext 

For this they know (and let it hide, 

With dread of what will happen next ; 

In part, the offences of their guide) 

And thinking it but sorry cheer, 

That Benjamin, with clouded brains, 

To have such company so near ! 

Is worth the best with all their pains ; 


And, if they had a prayer to make, 

This new arrangement made, the Wain 

The prayer would be that they may take 

Through the still night proceeds again ; 

With him whatever comes in course, 

No Moon hath risen her light to lend ; 

The better fortune or the worse ; 

But indistinctly may be kenned 

That no one else may have business near them, 

The Vanguard, following close behind, 

And, drank or sober, he may steer them. 

Sails spread, as if to catch the wind ! 

So, forth in dauntless mood they fare, 

" Thy wife and child are snug and warm, 

And with them goes the guardian pair. 

Thy ship will travel without harm ; 


I like," said Benjamin, u her shape and stature : 

Now, heroes, for the time commotion, 

And this of mine — this bulky creature 

The triumph of your late devotion ! 

Of which I have the steering — this, 

Can aught on earth impede delight, 

Seen fairly, is not much amiss ! 

Still mounting to a higher height ; 

We want your streamers, friend, you know; 

And higher still — a greedy flight ! 

But, altogether as we go, 

THE WAGGONER. 

 

We make a land of handsome show ! 
Among these hills, from first to last, 
We 've weathered many a furious blast ; 
Hard passage forcing on, with head 
Against the storm, and canvass spread. 
I hate a boaster ; but to thee 
Will say 't, who know'st both land and sea, 
The unluckiest hulk that stems the brine 
Is hardly worse beset than mine, 
When cross-winds on her quarter beat ; 
And, fairly lifted from my feet, 
I stagger onward — heaven knows how ; 
But not so pleasantly as now : 
Poor pilot I, by snows confounded, 
And many a foundrous pit surrounded ! 
Yet here we are, by night and day 
Grinding through rough and smooth our way ; 
Through foul and fair our task fulfilling ; 
And long shall be so yet — God willing !" 
" Ay," said the Tar, through fair and foul — 
But save us from yon screeching owl ! " 
That instant was begun a fray 
Which called their thoughts another way : 
The mastiff, ill-conditioned carl ! 
What must he do but growl aud snarl, 
Still more and more dissatisfied 
With the meek comrade at his side ! 
Till, not incensed though put to proof, 
The Ass, uplifting a hind hoof, 
Salutes the Mastiff on the head ; 
And so were better manners bred, 
And all was calmed and quieted. 
u Yon screech-owl," says the Sailor, turning 
Back to his former cause of mourning, 
" Yon owl ! — pray God that all be well ! 
'Tis worse than any funeral bell ; 
As sure as I 've the gift of sight, 
We shall be meeting ghosts to-night !" 
— Said Benjamin, " This whip shall lay 
A thousand, if they cross our way. 
I know that Wanton's noisy station, 
I know him and his occupation ; 
The jolly bird hath learned his cheer 
Upon the banks of Windermere ; 
Where a tribe of them make merry, 
Mocking the Man that keeps the ferry ; 
Hallooing from an open throat, 
Like travellers shouting for a boat. 
— The tricks he learned at Windermere 
This vagrant owl is playing here — 
I That is the worst of his employment : 
He 's at the top of his enjoyment !" 

This explanation stilled the alarm, 
Cured the foreboder like a charm ; 
This, and the manner, and the voice, 
Summoned the Sailor to rejoice ; 
His heart is up — he fears no evil 
From life or death, from man or devil ; 
He wheels — and, making many stops, 
Brandished his crutch against the mountain tops ; 
And, while he talked of blows and scars, 
Benjamin, among the stars, 
Beheld a dancing — and a glancing ; 
Such retreating and advancing 
As, I ween, was never seen 
In bloodiest battle since the days of Mars ! 

CANTO FOURTH. 
Thus they, with freaks of proud delight, 
Beguile the remnant of the night ; 
And many a snatch of jovial song 
Regales them as they wind along ; 
While to the music, from on high, 
The echoes make a glad reply. — 
But the sage Muse the revel heeds 
No farther than her story needs ; 
Nor will she servilely attend 
The loitering journey to its end. 
— Blithe spirits of her own impel 
The Muse, who scents the morning air, 
To take of this transported pair 
A brief and unreproved farewell ; 
To quit the slow-paced waggon's side, 
And wander down yon hawthorn dell, 
With murmuring Greta for her guide. 
— There doth she ken the awful form 
Of Raven-crag — black as a storm — 
Glimmering through the twilight pale ; 
And Ghimmer-crag, his tall twin brother, 
Each peering forth to meet the other : — 
And, while she roves through St. John's Vale, 
Along the smooth unpathwayed plain, 
By sheep-track or through cottage lane, 
Where no disturbance comes to intrude 
Upon the pensive solitude, 
Her unsuspecting eye, perchance, 
With the rude shepherd's favoured glance, 
Beholds the faeries in array, 
Whose party-coloured garments gay 
The silent company betray : 
Red, green, and blue ; a moment's sight  
For Skiddaw-top with rosy light 
Is touched — and all the band take flight. 

 The crag of the ewe lamb. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

— Fly also, Muse ! and from the dell 
Mount to the ridge of Nathdale Fell ; 
Thence, look thou forth o'er wood and lawn 
Hoar with the frost-like dews of dawn ; 
Across yon meadowy hottom look, 
Where close fogs hide their parent hrook ; 
And see, beyond that hamlet small, 
The ruined towers of Threlkeld-hall, 
Lurking in a double shade, 
By trees and lingering twilight made ! 
There, at Blencathara's rugged feet, 
Sir Lancelot gave a safe retreat 
To noble Clifford ; from annoy 
Concealed the persecuted boy, 
Well pleased in rustic garb to feed 
His flock, and pipe on shepherd's reed 
Among this multitude of hills, 
Crags, woodlands, waterfalls, and rills ; 
Which soon the morning shall enfold, 
From east to west, in ample vest 
Of massy gloom and radiance bold. 
The mists, that o'er the streamlet's bed 
Hung low, begin to rise and spread ; 
Even while I speak, their skirts of grey 
Are smitten by a silver ray ; 
And lo ! — up Castrigg's naked steep 
(Where, smoothly urged, the vapours sweep 
Along — and scatter and divide, 
Like fleecy clouds self-multiplied) 
The stately waggon is ascending, 
With faithful Benjamin attending, 
Apparent now beside his team — 
Now lost amid a glittering steam : 
And with him goes his Sailor-friend, 
By this time near their journey's end ; 
And, after their high-minded riot, 
Sickening into thoughtful quiet ; 
As if the morning's pleasant hour, 
Had for their joys a killing power. 
And, sooth, for Benjamin a vein 
Is opened of still deeper pain 
As if his heart by notes were stung 
From out the lowly hedge-rows flung ; 
As if the warbler lost in light 
Reproved his soarings of the night, 
In strains of rapture pure and holy 
Upbraided his distempered folly. 
Drooping is he, his step is dull ; 
But the horses stretch and pull ; 
With increasing vigour climb, 
Eager to repair lost time ; 
Whether, by their own desert, 

Knowing what cause there is for shame, 
They are labouring to avert 
As much as may be of the blame, 
Which, they foresee, must soon alight 
Upon his head, whom, in despite 
Of all his failings, they love best ; 
Whether for him they are distrest, 
Or, by length of fasting roused, 
Are impatient to be housed : 
Up against the hill they strain 
Tugging at the iron chain, 
Tugging all with might and main, 
Last and foremost, every horse 
To the utmost of his force ! 
And the smoke and respiration, 
Rising like an exhalation, 
Blend with the mist — a moving shroud 
To form, an undissolving cloud ; 
Which, with slant ray, the merry sun 
Takes delight to play upon. 
Never golden-haired Apollo, 
Pleased some favourite chief to follow 
Through accidents of peace or war, 
In a perilous moment threw 
Around the object of his care 
Veil of such celestial hue ; 
Interposed so bright a screen — 
Him and his enemies between ! 
Alas ! what boots it ? — who can hide, 
When the malicious Fates are bent 
On working out an ill intent ? 
Can destiny be turned aside  
No — sad progress of my story ! 
Benjamin, this outward glory 
Cannot shield thee from thy Master, 
Who from Keswick has pricked forth, 
Sour and surly as the north ; 
And, in fear of some disaster, 
Comes to give what help he may, 
And to hear what thou canst say ; 
If, as needs he must forebode, 
Thou hast been loitering on the road ! 
His fears, his doubts, may now take flight — 
The wished-for object is in sight ; 
Yet, trust the Muse, it rather hath 
Stirred him up to livelier wrath ; 
Which he stifles, moody man ! 
With all the patience that he can ; 
To the end that, at your meeting, 
He may give thee decent greeting. 
There he is — resolved to stop, 
Till the waggon gains the top ; 

THE WAGGONER. 

 

Put stop he cannot — must advance : 
Him Benjamin, with lucky glance, 
Espies — and instantly is ready, 
Self-collected, poised, and steady : 
And, to he the hetter seen, 
Issues from his radiant shroud, 
From his close-attending cloud, 
With careless air and open mien. 
Erect his port, and firm his going ; 
So struts yon cock that now is crowing ; 
And the morning light in grace 
Strikes upon his lifted face, 
Hurrying the pallid hue away 
That might his trespasses betray. 
But what can all avail to clear him, 
Or what need of explanation, 
Parley or interrogation ? 
For the Master sees, alas ! 
That unhappy Figure near him, 
'Limping o'er the dewy grass, 
Where the road it fringes, sweet, 
Soft and cool to way-worn feet; 
And, indignity ! an Ass, 
By his noble Mastiff's side, 
Tethered to the waggon's tail : 
And the ship, in all her pride, 
Following after in full sail ! 
Not to speak of babe and mother ; 
Who, contented with each other, 
And snug as birds in leafy arbour, 
Find, within, a blessed harbour ! 

With eager eyes the Master pries ; 
(Looks in and out, and through and through : 
Says nothing — till at last he spies 
A wound upon the Mastiff's head, 
A wound, where plainly might be read 
What feats an Ass's hoof can do ! 
But drop the rest : — this aggravation, 
This complicated provocation, 
A. hoard of grievances unsealed ; 
All past forgiveness it repealed ; 
And thus, and through distempered blood 
On both sides, Benjamin the good, 
The patient, and the tender-hearted, 
Was from his team and waggon parted ; 
When duty of that day was o'er, 
Laid down his whip — and served no more.— 
Nor could the waggon long survive, 
j Which Benjamin had ceased to drive : 
ilt lingered on ; — guide after guide 
(Ambitiously the office tried ; 
;But each unmanageable hill 
] Called for his patience and his skill ; — 

And sure it is, that through this night, 
And what the morning brought to light, 
Two losses had we to sustain, 
We lost both Waggoner and Wain ! 

Accept, Friend, for praise or blame, 
The gift of this adventurous song ; 
A record which I dared to frame, 
Though timid scruples checked me long ; 
They checked me — and I left the theme 
Untouched ; — in spite of many a gleam 
Of fancy which thereon was shed, 
Like pleasant sunbeams shifting still 
Upon the side of a distant hill : 
But Nature might not be gainsaid ; 
For what I have and what I miss 
I sing of these ; — it makes my bliss ! 
Nor is it I who play the part, 
But a shy spirit in my heart, 
That comes and goes — will sometimes leap 
From hiding-places ten years deep ; 
Or haunts me with familiar face, 
Returning, like a ghost unlaid, 
Until the debt I owe be paid. 
Forgive me, then ; for I had been 
On friendly terms with this Machine : 
In him, while he was wont to trace 
Our roads, through many a long year's space, 
A living almanack had we; 
We had a speaking diary, 
That in this uneventful place, 
Gave to the days a mark and name 
By which we knew them when they came. 
— Yes, I, and all about me here, 
Through all the changes of the year, 
Had seen him through the mountains go, 
In pomp of mist or pomp of snow, 
Majestically huge and slow : 
Or, with a milder grace adorning 
The landscape of a summer's morning ; 
While Grasmere smoothed her liquid plain 
The moving image to detain; 
And mighty Fairfield, with a chime 
Of echoes, to his march kept time ; 
When little other business stirred, 
And little other sound was heard ; 
In that delicious hour of balm, 
Stillness, solitude, and calm, 
While yet the valley is arrayed, 
On this side with a sober shade ; 
On that is prodigally bright — 
Crag, lawn, and wood — with rosy light. 

 

POEMS OF THE FANCY. 

— But most of all, thou lordly Wain ! 
I wish to have thee here again, 
When windows flap and chimney roars, 
And all is dismal out of doors ; 
And, sitting by my fire, I see 
Eight sorry carts, no less a train ! 
Unworthy successors of thee, 
Come straggling through the wind and rain : 
And oft, as they pass slowly on, 
Beneath my windows, one by one, 
See, perched upon the naked height 
The summit of a cumbrous freight, 
A single traveller — and there 
Another ; then perhaps a pair — 

The lame, the sickly, and the old ; 
Men, women, heartless with the cold ; 
And babes in wet and starveling plight ;. 
Which once, be weather as it might, 
Had still a nest within a nest, 
Thy shelter — and their mother's breast ! 
Then most of all, then far the most, 
Do I regret what we have lost ; 
Am grieved for that unhappy sin 
Which robbed us of good Benjamin ; — ■ 
And of his stately Charge, which none 
Could keep alive when He was gone ! 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THERE WAS A BOY. 
There was a Boy ; ye knew him well, ye cliffs 
And islands of Winander ! — many a time, 
At evening, when the earliest stars began 
To move along the edges of the hills, 
Rising or setting, would he stand alone, 
Beneath the trees, or by the glimmering lake ; 
And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands 
Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth 
Uplifted, he, as through an instrument, 
Blew mim ic hootings to the silent owls, 
That they might answer him. — And they would shout 
Across the watery vale, and shout again, 
Responsive to Ms call, — with quivering peals, 
And long halloos, and screams, and echoes loud 
Redoubled and redoubled ; concourse wild 
Of jocund din ! And, when there came a pause 
Of silenco such as baffled his best skill : 
Then, sometimes, in that silence, while he hung 
Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise 
Has carried far into his heart the voice 
Of mountain-torrents ; or the visible scene 
Would enter unawares into his mind 
With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, 
Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received 
Into the bosom of the steady lake. 
This boy was taken from his mates, and died 
In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old. 
Pre-eminent in beauty is the vale 
Where he was born and bred : the church-yard hangs 
Upon a slope above the village-school ; 
And, through that church-yard when my way has led 
On summer-evenings, I believe, that there 
A long half-hour together I have stood 
Mute — looking at the grave in which he lies ! 
- 

TO THE CUCKOO. 
blithe New-comer ! I have heard, 
 hear thee and rejoice. 
Cuckoo ! shall I call thee Bird, 
Or but a wandering Voice ? 

While I am lying on the grass 
Thy twofold shout I hear, 
From hill to hill it seems to pass, 
At once far off, and near. 
Though babbling only to the Vale, 
Of sunshine and of flowers, 
Thou bringest unto me a tale 
Of visionary hours. 
Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring ! 
Even yet thou art to me 
No bird, but an invisible tiling, 
A voice, a mystery ; 
The same whom in my school-boy days 
I listened to ; that Cry 
Which made me look a thousand ways 
In bush, and tree, and sky. 
To seek thee did I often rove 
Through woods and on the green ; 
And thou wert still a hope, a love ; 
Still longed for, never seen. 
And I can listen to thee yet ; 
Can He upon the plain 
And listen, till I do beget 
That golden time again. 
O blessed Bird ! the earth we pace 
Again appears to be 
An unsubstantial, faery place ; 
That is fit home for Thee ! 

ill. 
A NIGHT-PIECE. 

The sky is overcast 
With a continuous cloud of texture close, 
Heavy and wan, all whitened by the Moon, 
Which through that veil is indistinctly seen, 
A dull, contracted circle, yielding light 
So feebly spread, that not a shadow falls, 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Chequering the ground — from rock, plant, tree, or 
tower. 
At length a pleasant instantaneous gleam 
Startles the pensive traveller while he treads 
His lonesome path, with unohserving eye 
Bent earthwards ; he looks up — the clouds are split 
Asunder, — and above his head he sees 
The clear Moon, and the glory of the heavens. 
There, in a black-blue vault she sails along, 
Followed by multitudes of stars, that, small 
And sharp, and bright, along the dark abyss 
Drive as she drives : how fast they wheel away, 
Yet vanish not ! — the wind is in the tree, 
But they are silent ; — still they roll along 
Immeasurably distant ; and the vault, 
Built round by those white clouds, enormous clouds, 
Still deepens its unfathomable depth. 
At length the Vision closes ; and the mind, 
Not undisturbed by the delight it feels, 
Which slowly settles into peaceful calm, 
Is left to muse upon the solemn scene. 
. 

AIREY-FORCE VALLEY. 
Not a breath of air 

Ruffles the bosom of this leafy glen. 
From the brook's margin, wide around, the trees 
Are stedfast as the rocks ; the brook itself, 
Old as the hills that feed it from afar, 
Doth rather deepen than disturb the calm 
Where all things else are still and motionless. 
And yet, even now, a little breeze, perchance 
Escaped from boisterous winds that rage without, 
Has entered, by the sturdy oaks unfelt, 
But to its gentle touch how sensitive 
Is the light ash ! that, pendent from the brow 
Of yon dim cave, in seeming silence makes 
A soft eye-music of slow-waving boughs, 
Powerful almost as vocal harmony 
To stay the wanderer's steps and soothe his thoughts. 

YEW-TEEES. 

There is a Yew-tree, pride of Lorton Vale, 
Which to this day stands single, in the midst 
Of its own darkness, as it stood of yore : 
Not loth to furnish weapons for the bands 
Of Umfraville or Percy ere they marched 

To Scotland's heaths ; or those that crossed the j 
And drew their sounding bows at Azincour, 
Perhaps at earlier Crecy, or Poictiers. 
Of vast circumference and gloom profound • 
This solitary Tree ! a living thing 
Produced too slowly ever to decay ; 
Of form and aspect too magnificent 
To be destroyed. But worthier still of note 
Are those fraternal Four of Borrowdale, 
Joined in one solemn and capacious grove ; 
Huge trunks ! and each particular trunk a gro\ 
Of intertwisted fibres serpentine 
Up-coiling, and inveterately convolved ; 
Nor uninformed with Phantasy, and looks 
That threaten the profane ; — a pillared shade, 
Upon whose grassless floor of red-brown hue, 
By sheddings from the pining umbrage tinged 
Perennially — beneath whose sable roof 
Of boughs, as if for festal purpose, decked 
With unrejoicing berries — ghostly Shapes 
May meet at noontide ; Fear and trembling Hop 
Silence and Foresight ; Death the Skeleton 
And Time the Shadow ; — there to celebrate, 
As in a natural temple scattered o'er 
With altars undisturbed of mossy stone, 
United worship ; or in mute repose 
To lie, and listen to the mountain flood 
Murmuring from Glaramara's inmost caves. 
 

NUTTING. 
It seems a day 

(I speak of one from many singled out) 
One of those heavenly days that cannot die ; 
When, in the eagerness of boyish hope, 
I left our cottage-threshold, sallying forth 
With a huge wallet o'er my shoulders slung, 
A nutting-crook in hand ; and turned my steps 
Tow'rd some far-distant wood, a Figure quaint, 
Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds 
Which for that service had been husbanded, 
By exhortation of my frugal Danie — 
Motley accoutrement, of power to smile 
At thorns, and brakes, and brambles, — and, in truth, 
More ragged than need was ! O'er pathless rocks, 
Through beds of matted fern, and tangled thickets, 
Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook 
Unvisited, where not a broken bough 
Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign 
Of devastation ; but the hazels rose 
Tall and erect, with tempting clusters hung, 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

k virgin scene ! — A little while I stood, 
jreathing with such suppression of the heart 
Is joy delights in ; and, with wise restraint 
Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed 
•[he banquet ; — or beneath the trees I sate 
bnong the flowers, and with the flowers I played; 
V temper known to those, who, after long 
\nd weary expectation, have been blest 
With sudden happiness beyond all hope. 
Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves 
Che violets of five seasons re-appear 
^.nd fade, unseen by any human eye ; 
Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on 
ror ever ; and I saw the sparkling foam, 
\nd — with my cheek on one of those green stones 
That, fleeced with moss, under the shady trees, 
jay round me, scattered like a flock of sheep — 
'. heard the murmur and the murmuring sound, 
' n that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay 
Tribute to ease ; and, of its joy secure, 
The heart luxuriates with indifferent things, 
Wasting its kindliness on stocks and Stones, 
^nd on the vacant ah. Then up I rose, 
^nd dragged to earth both branch and bough, with 
crash 
bid merciless ravage : and the shady nook 
)f hazels, and the green and mossy bower, 
)eformed and sullied, patiently gave up 
^eir quiet being : and, unless I now 
Jonfound my present feelings with the past ; 
ire from the mutilated bower I turned 
Sxulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings, 
I felt a sense of pain when I beheld 
Che silent trees, and saw the intruding sky. — 
Chen, dearest Maiden, move along these shades 
In gentleness of heart ; with gentle hand 
Couch — for there is a spirit in the woods. 
. 

THE SIMPLON PASS. 
-Brook and road 

'Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass, 
^nd with them did we journey several hours 
iVt a slow step. The immeasurable height 
)f woods decaying, never to be decayed, 
the stationary blasts of waterfalls, 
nd in the narrow rent, at every turn, 
[Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn, 
The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky, 
The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, 
ack drizzling crags that spake by the wayside 

As if a voice were in them, the sick sight 
And giddy prospect of the raving stream, 
The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens, 
Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light — 
Were all like workings of one mind, the features 
Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree, 
Characters of the great Apocalypse, 
The types and symbols of Eternity, 
Of first, and last, and midst, and without end. 
. 

She was a Phantom of delight 
When first she gleamed upon my sight ; 
A lovely Apparition, sent 
To be a moment's ornament ; 
Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair ; 
Like Twilight's, too, her dusky hair ; 
But all things else about her drawn 
From May-time and the cheerful Dawn ; 
A dancing Shape, an Image gay, 
To haunt, to startle, and way-lay. 
I saw her upon nearer view, 
A Spirit, yet a Woman too ! 
Her household motions light and free, 
And steps of virgin-liberty ; 
A countenance in which did meet 
Sweet records, promises as sweet ; 
A Creature not too bright or good 
For human nature's daily food ; 
For transient sorrows, simple wiles, 
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles. 
And now I see with eye serene 
The very pulse of the machine ; 
A Being breathing thoughtful breath, 
A Traveller between life and death ; 
The reason firm, the temperate will, 
Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill ; 
A perfect Woman, nobly planned, 
To warn, to comfort, and command ; 
And yet a Spirit still, and bright 
With something of angelic light. 

O Nightingale ! thou surely art 
A creature of a ' fiery heart ' : — 
These notes of thine — they pierce and pierce ; 
Tumultuous harmony and fierce ! 
Thou sing'st as if the God of wine 
Had helped thee to a Valentine ; 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

A song in mockery and despite 
Of shades, and dews, and silent night ; 
And steady bliss, and all the loves 
Now sleeping in these peaceful groves. 
I heard a Stock-dove sing or say 
His homely tale, this very day ; 
His voice was buried among trees, 
Yet to be come-at by the breeze : 
He did not cease ; but cooed — and cooed : 
And somewhat pensively he wooed : 
He sang of love, with quiet blending, 
Slow to begin, and never ending ; 
Of serious faith, and inward glee ; 
That was the song — the song for me ! 

Three years she grew in sun and shower, 
Then Nature said, " A lovelier flower 
On earth was never sown ; 
This Child I to myself will take ; 
She shall be mine, and I will make 
A Lady of my own. 
Myself will to my darling be 
Both law and impulse : and with me 
The Girl, in rock and plain, 
In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, 
Shall feel an overseeing power 
To kindle or restrain. 
She shall be sportive as the fawn 
That wild with glee across the lawn 
Or up the mountain springs ; 
And her's shall be the breathing balm, 
And her's the silence and the calm 
Of mute insensate things. 
The floating clouds their state shall lend 
To her ; for her the willow bend ; 
Nor shall she fail to see 
Even in the motions of the Storm 
Grace that shall mould the Maiden's form 
By silent sympathy. 
The stars of midnight shall be dear 
To her ; and she shall lean her ear 
In many a secret place 
Where rivulets dance their wayward round, 
And beauty born of murmuring sound 
Shall pass into her face, 

And vital feelings of delight 
Shall rear her form to stately height, 
Her virgin bosom swell ; 
Such thoughts to Lucy I will give 
While she and I together live 
Here in this happy dell." 
Thus Nature spake — The work was done — 
How soon my Lucy's race was run ! 
She died, and left to me 
This heath, this calm, and quiet scene ; 
The memory of what has been, 
And never more will be. 

A slumber did my spirit seal ; 
I had no human fears : 
She seemed a thing that could not feel 
The touch of earthly years. 
No motion has she now, no force ; 
She neither hears nor sees ; 
Rolled round in earth's diurnal course, 
With x'ocks, and stones, and trees. 

I wandered lonely as a cloud 
That floats on high o'er vales and hills, 
When all at once I saw a crowd, 
A host, of golden daffodils ; 
Beside the lake, beneath the trees, 
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze. 
Continuous as the stars that shine 
And twinkle on the milky way, 
They stretched in never-ending line 
Along the margin of a bay : 
Ten thousand saw I at a glance, 
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance. 
The waves beside them danced ; but they 
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee : 
A poet could not but be gay, 
In such a jocund company : 
I gazed — and gazed — but little thought 
What wealth the show to me had brought : 
For oft, when on my couch I He 
In vacant or in pensive mood, 



POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

; They flash upon that inward eye 
I Which is the bliss of solitude ; 
And then my heart with pleasure fills, 
And dances with the daffodils. 

. 

XIII. 
THE REVERIE OF POOR SUSAN. 
At the corner of Wood Street, when daylight 
appears, 
Hangs a Thrush that sings loud, it has sung for 
three years : 
Poor Susan has passed by the spot, and has heard 
In the silence of morning the song of the Bird. 
'Tis a note of enchantment; whatailsher? Shesees 
A mountain ascending, a vision of trees ; 
Bright volumes of vapour through Lothbury glide, 
And a river flows on through the vale of Cheapside. 
Green pastures she views in the midst of the dale, 
Down which she so often has tripped with her pail ; 
And a single small cottage, a nest like a dove's, 
The one only dwelling on earth that she loves. 
She looks, and her heart is in heaven : but they fade, 
The mist and the river, the hill and the shade : 
The stream will not flow, and the hill will not rise, 
And the colours have all passed away from her eyes ! 
- 

XIV. 
POWER OF MUSIC. 
An Orpheus ! an Orpheus ! yes, Faith may grow bold, 
And take to herself all the wonders of old ; — 
Near the stately Pantheon you ' meet with the same 
In the street that from Oxford hath borrowed its 

His station is there ; and he works on the crowd, 
He sways them with harmony merry and loud ; 
He fills with his power all their hearts to the brim — 
Was aught ever heard like his fiddle and him % 
What an eager assembly ! what an empire is this ! 
The weary have life, and the hungry have bliss ; 
The mourner is cheered, and the anxious have rest ; 
And the guilt-burthened soul is no longer opprest. 

As the Moon brightens round her the clouds of the 
night, 
So He, where he stands, is a centre of light ; 
It gleams on the face, there, of dusky-browed Jack, 
And the pale-visaged Baker's, with basket on back. 
That errand-bound 'Prentice was passing in haste — 
What matter ! he 's caught — and his time runs to 
waste ; 
The Newsman is stopped, though he stops on the 
fret ; 
And the half-breathless Lamplighter — he 's in the 
net! 
The Porter sits down on the weight which he bore ; 
The Lass with her barrow wheels hither her store ; — 
If a thief could be here he might pilfer at ease ; 
She sees the Musician, 'tis all that she sees ! 
He stands, backed by the wall ; — he abates not his 
din; 
His hat gives him vigour, with boons dropping in, 
From the old and the young, from the poorest ; 
and there ! 
The one-pennied Boy has his penny to spare. 
blest are the hearers, and proud be the hand 
Of the pleasure it spreads through so thankful a 
band ; 
 am glad for him, blind as he is ! — all the while 
If they speak 'tis to praise, and they praise with a 
smile. 
That tall Man, a giant in bulk and in height, 
Not an inch of his body is free from delight ; 
Can he keep himself still, if he would ? oh, not he ! 
The music stirs in him like wind through a tree. 
Mark that Cripple who leans on his crutch ; like a 
tower 
That long has leaned forward, leans hour after 
hour ! — 
That Mother, whose spirit in fetters is bound, 
While she dandles the Babe in her arms to the sound. 
Now, coaches and chariots ! roar on like a stream ; 
Here are twenty souls happy as souls in a dream : 
They are deaf to your murmurs— they care not for 
Nor what ye are flying, nor what ye pursue ! 
lfiOfi. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

xv. 
STAR-GAZERS. 
What crowd is this ? what have we here ! we must 
not pass it by ; 
A Telescope upon its frame, and pointed to the sky : 
Long is it as a barber's pole, or mast of little boat, 
Some little pleasure-skiff, that doth on Thames 's 
waters float. 
The Show-man chooses well his place, 'tis Leicester's 
busy Square ; 
And is as happy in his night, for the heavens are 
blue and fair ; 
Calm, though impatient, is the crowd ; each stands 
ready with the fee, 
And envies him that 's looking ; — what an insight 
must it be ! 
Yet, Showman, where can lie the cause ? Shall thy 
Implement have blame, 
A boaster, that when he is tried, fails, and is put 
to shame ? 
Or is it good as others are, and be their eyes in 
fault? 
Their eyes, or minds ? or, finally, is yon resplendent 
vault ? 
Is nothing of that radiant pomp so good as we have 
here? 
Or gives a thing but small delight that never can 
be dear? 
The silver moon with all her vales, and hills of 
mightiest fame, 
Doth she betray us when they 're seen ? or are they 
but a name ? 
Or is it rather that Conceit rapacious is and strong, 
And bounty never yields so much but it seems to 
do her wrong ? 
Or is it, that when human Souls a journey long 
have had 
And are returned into themselves, they cannot but 
be sad ? 
Or must we be constrained to think that these 
Spectators rude, 
Poor in estate, of manners base, men of the multi- 
tude, 
Have souls which never yet have risen, and there- 
fore prostrate lie ? 
No, no, this cannot be ; — men thirst for power and 
majesty ! 

Does, then, a deep and earnest thought the blissful 
mind employ 
Of him who gazes, or has gazed ? a grave and steady 
j°y» 
That doth reject all show of pride, admits no out- 
ward sign, 
Because not of this noisy world, but silent and 
divine ! 
Whatever be the cause, 'tis sure that they who 
pry and pore 
Seem to meet with little gain, seem less happy than 
before : 
One after One they take their turn, nor have I one 
espied 
That doth not slackly go away, as if dissatisfied. 
. 

WRITTEN IN MARCH, 
WHILE RESTING ON THE BRIDGE AT THE FOOT OF 
BROTHER'S WATER. 
The Cock is crowing, 
The stream is flowing, 
The small birds twitter, 
The lake doth glitter, 
The green field sleeps in the sun ; 
The oldest and youngest 
Are at work with the strongest ; 
The cattle are grazing, 
Their heads never raising ; 
There are forty feeding like one ! 
Like an army defeated 
The snow hath retreated, 
And now doth fare ill 
On the top of the bare hill ; 
The Ploughboy is whooping — anon — anon : 
There 's joy in the mountains ; 
There 's life in the fountains ; 
Small clouds are sailing, 
Blue sky prevailing ; 
The rain is over and gone ! 
. 



POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

Lyre ! though such power do in thy magic live 
As might from India's farthest plain 
Recal the not unwilling Maid, 
Assist me to detain 
The lovely Fugitive : 
Check with thy notes the impulse which, betrayed 
By her sweet farewell looks, I longed to aid. 
Here let me gaze em-apt upon that eye, 
The impregnable and awe-inspiring fort 
Of contemplation, the calm port 
By reason fenced from winds that sigh 
Among the restless sails of vanity. 
But if no wish be hers that we should part, 
A humbler bliss would satisfy my heart. 
Where all things are so fair, 
Enough by her dear side to breathe the air 
Of this Elysian weather ; 
And, on or in, or near, the brook, espy 
Shade upon the sunshine lying 
Faint and somewhat pensively ; 
And downward Image gaily vying 
With its upright living tree 
Mid silver clouds, and openings of blue sky 
As soft almost and deep as her cerulean eye. 
Nor less the joy with many a glance 
Cast up the Stream or down at her beseeehing, 
To mark its eddying foam-balls prettily distrest 
By ever-changing shape and want of rest ; 
Or watch, with mutual teaching, 
The current as it plays 
In flashing leaps and stealthy creeps 
Adown a rocky maze ; 
Or note (translucent summer's happiest chance !) 
In the slope-channel floored with pebbles bright, 
Stones of all hues, gem emulous of gem, 
So vivid that they take from keenest sight 
The liquid veil that seeks not to hide them. 

BEGGARS. 


She had a tall man's height or more ; 
Her face from summer's noontide heat 
No bonnet shaded, but she wore 
A mantle, to her very feet 
Descending with a graceful flow, 
And on her head a cap as white as new-fallen snow. 

Her skin was of Egyptian brown : 
Haughty, as if her eye had seen 
Its own light to a distance thrown, 
She towered, fit person for a Queen 
To lead those ancient Amazonian files ; 
Or ruling Bandit's wife among the Grecian isles. 
Advancing, forth she stretched her hand 
And begged an alms with doleful plea 
That ceased not ; on our English land 
Such woes, I knew, could never be ; 
And yet a boon I gave her, for the creature 
Was beautiful to see — a weed of glorious feature. 
I left her, and pursued my way ; 
And soon before me did espy 
A pair of little Boys at play, 
Chasing a crimson butterfly ; 
The taller followed with his hat in hand, 
Wreathed round with yellow flowers the gayest of 
the land. 
The other wore a rimless crown 
With leaves of laurel stuck about ; 
And, while both followed up and down, 
Each whooping with a merry shout, 
Inj their fraternal features I could trace 
Unquestionable lines of that wild Suppliant's face. 
Yet the y, so blithe of heart, seemed fit 
For finest tasks of earth or air : 
Wings let them have, and they might flit 
Precursors to Aurora's car, 
Scattering fresh flowers ; though happier far, I 
ween, 
To hunt their fluttering game o'er rock and level 
green. 
They dart across my path — but lo, 
Each ready with a plaintive whine ! 
Said I, " not half an hour ago 
Your Mother has had alms of mine." 
" That cannot be," one answered — " she is dead : " — 
I looked reproof — they saw— but neither hung his 
head. 
" She has been dead, Sir, many a day." — 
"Hush, boys ! you 're telling me a lie ; 
It was your Mother, as I say !" 
And, in the twinkling of an eye, 
" Come ! come !" cried one, and without more ado, 
Off to some other play the joyous Vagrants flew ! 
. 

 


POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

SEQUEL TO THE FOREGOING, 
COMPOSED MANY YEARS AFTER. 
Where are they now, those wanton Boys ? 
For whose free range the daedal earth 
Was filled with animated toys, 
And implements of frolic mirth ; 
With tools for ready wit to guide ; 
And ornaments of seemlier pride, 
More fresh, more bright, than princes wear ; 
For what one moment flung aside, 
Another could repair ; 
What good or evil have they seen 
Since I their pastime witnessed here, 
Their daring wiles, their sportive cheer ? 
I ask — hut all is dark between ! 
They met me in a genial hour, 
When universal nature breathed 
As with the breath of one sweet flower, — 
A time to overrule the power 
Of discontent, and check the birth 
Of thoughts with better thoughts at strife, 
The most familiar bane of life 
Since parting Innocence bequeathed 
Mortality to Earth ! 
Soft clouds, the whitest of the year, 
Sailed through the sky — the brooks ran clear ; 
The lambs from rock to rock were bounding ; 
With songs the budded groves resounding ; 
And to my heart are still endeared 
The thoughts with which it then was cheered ; 
The faith which saw that gladsome pah- 
Walk through the fire with unsinged hair. 
Or, if such faith must needs deceive — 
Then, Spirits of beauty and of grace, 
Associates in that eager chase ; 
Ye, who within the blameless mind 
Your favourite seat of empire find — 
Kind Spirits ! may we not believe 
That they, so happy and so fair 
Through your sweet influence, and the care 
Of pitying Heaven, at least were free 
From touch of deadly injury  
Destined, whate'er their earthly doom, 
For mercy and immortal bloom ! 
. 

GIPSIES. 
Yet are they here the same unbroken knot 
Of human Beings, in the self-same spot ! 
Men, women, children, yea the frame 
Of the whole spectacle the same ! 
Only their fire seems bolder, yielding light, 
Now deep and red, the colouring of night ; 
That on their Gipsy-faces falls, 
Their bed of straw and blanket-walls. 
— Twelve hours, twelve bounteous hours are gone, 
while I 
Have been a traveller under open sky, 
Much witnessing of change and cheer, 
Yet as I left I find them here ! 
The weary Sun betook himself to rest ; — 
Then issued Vesper from the fulgent west, 
Outshining like a visible God 
The glorious path in which he trod. 
And now, ascending, after one dark hour 
And one night's diminution of her power, 
Behold the mighty Moon ! this way 
She looks as if at them — but they 
Regard not her : — oh better wrong and strife 
(By nature transient) than this torpid fife ; 
Life which the very stars reprove 
As on their silent tasks they move ! 
Yet, witness all that stirs in heaven or earth ! 
In scorn I speak not ; — they are what their birfc 
And breeding suffer them to be ; 
Wild outcasts of society ! 
 

RUTH. 
When Ruth was left half desolate, 
Her Father took another Mate ; 
And Ruth, not seven years old, 
A slighted child, at her own will 
Went wandering over dale and hill, 
In thoughtless freedom, bold. 
And she had made a pipe of straw, 
And music from that pipe could draw 
Like sounds of winds and floods ; 
Had built a bower upon the green, 
As if she from her birth had been 
An infant of the woods. 

RUTH. 

 

Beneath her father's roof, alone 
She seemed to live ; her thoughts her own ; 
Herself her own delight ; 
Pleased with herself, nor sad, nor gay ; 
And, passing thus the live-long day, 
She grew to woman's height. 
There came a Youth from Georgia's shore- 
A military casque he wore, 
With splendid feathers drest ; 
He brought them from the Cherokees ; 
The feathers nodded in the breeze, 
And made a gallant crest. 
From Indian blood you deem him sprung : 
But no ! he spake the English tongue, 
And bore a soldier's name ; 
And, when America was free 
From battle and from jeopardy, 
He 'cross the ocean came. 
With hues of genius on his cheek 
In finest tones the Youth could speak : 
— While he was yet a boy, 
The moon, the glory of the sun, 
And streams that murmur as they run, 
Had been his dearest joy. 
He was a lovely Youth ! I guess 
The panther in the wilderness 
Was not so fair as he ; 
And, when he chose to sport and play, 
No dolphin ever was so gay 
Upon the tropic sea. 
Among the Indians he had fought, 
And with him many tales he brought 
Of pleasure and of fear ; 
Such tales as told to any maid 
By such a Youth, in the green shade, 
Were perilous to hear. 
He told of girls — a happy rout ! 
Who quit their fold with dance and shout, 
Their pleasant Indian town, 
To gather strawberries all day long ; 
Returning with a choral song 
When daylight is gone down. 
He spake of plants that hourly change 
Their blossoms, through a boundless range 
Of intermingling hues ; 
With budding, fading, faded flowers 
They stand the wonder of the bowers 
From morn to evening dews. 

He told of the magnolia, spread 
High as a cloud, high over head ! 
The cypress and her spire ; 
— Of flowers that with one scarlet gleam 
Cover a hundred leagues, and seem 
To set the hills on fire. 
The Youth of green savannahs spake, 
And many an endless, endless lake, 
With all its fairy crowds 
Of islands, that together he 
As quietly as spots of sky 
Among the evening clouds. 
" How pleasant," then he said, " it were 
A fisher or a hunter there, 
In sunshine or in shade 
To wander with an easy mind ; 
And build a household fire, and find 
A home in every glade ! 
What days and what bright years ! Ah me ! 
Our life were life indeed, with thee 
So passed in quiet bliss, 
And all the while," said he, K to know 
That we were in a world of woe, 
On such an earth as this !" 
And then he sometimes interwove 
Fond thoughts about a father's love : 
" For there," said he, " are spun 
Around the heart such tender ties, 
That our own children to our eyes 
Are dearer than the sun. 
Sweet Ruth ! and could you go with me 
My helpmate in the woods to be, 
Our shed at night to rear ; 
Or run, my own adopted bride, 
A sylvan huntress at my side, 
And drive the flying deer ! 
Beloved Ruth !" — No more he said. 
The wakeful Ruth at midnight shed 
A solitary tear : 
She thought again — and did agree 
With him to sail across the sea, 
And drive the flying deer. 
a And now, as fitting is and right, 
We in the church our faith will plight, 
A husband and a wife." 
Even so they did ; and I may say 
That to sweet Ruth that happy day 
Was more than human life. 

 POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Through dream and vision did she sink, 

And yet he with no feigned delight 

Delighted all the while to think 

Had wooed the Maiden, day and night 

That on those lonesome floods, 

Had loved her, night and morn : 

And green savannahs, she should share 

What could he less than love a Maid 

His board with lawful joy, and bear 

Whose heart with so much nature played ? 

His name in the wild woods. 

So kind and so forlorn ! 

But, as you have before been told, 

Sometimes, most earnestly, he said, 

This Stripling, sportive, gay, and bold, 

" Ruth ! I have been worse than dead ; 

And, with his dancing crest, 

False thoughts, thoughts bold and vain, 

So beautiful, through savage lands 

Encompassed me on every side 

Had roamed about, with vagrant bands 

When I, in confidence and pride, 

Of Indians in the West. 

Had crossed the Atlantic main. 

The wind, the tempest roaring high, 

Before me shone a glorious world — 

The tumult of a tropic sky, 

Fresh as a banner bright, unfurled 

Might well be dangerous food 

To music suddenly : 

For him, a Youth to whom was given 

I looked upon those hills and plains, 

So much of earth — so much of heaven, 

And seemed as if let loose from chains, 

And such impetuous blood. 

To live at liberty. 

Whatever in those climes he found 

No more of this ; for now, by thee 

Irregular in sight or sound 

Dear Ruth ! more happily set free 

Did to his mind impart 

With nobler zeal I burn ; 

A kindred impulse, seemed allied 

My soul from darkness is released, 

To his own powers, and justified 

Like the whole sky when to the east 

The workings of his heart. 

The morning doth return." 

Nor less, to feed voluptuous thought, 

Full soon that better mind was gone ; 

The beauteous forms of nature wrought, 

No hope, no wish remained, not one, — 

Fair trees and gorgeous flowers ; 

They stirred him now no more ; 

The breezes their own languor lent ; 

New objects did new pleasure give, 

The stars had feelings, which they sent 

And once again he wished to live 

Into those favored bowers. 

As lawless as before. 

Yet, in his worst pursuits, I ween 

Meanwhile, as thus with him it fared, 

That sometimes there did intervene 

They for the voyage were prepared, 

Pure hopes of high intent : 

And went to the sea-shore, 

For passions linked to forms so fair 

But, when they thither came, the Youth 

And stately, needs must have their share 

Deserted his poor Bride, and Ruth 

Of noble sentiment. 

Could never find him more. 

But ill he lived, much evil saw, 

God help thee, Ruth ! — Such pains she had, 

With men to whom no better law 

That she in half a year was mad, 

Nor better life was known ; 

And in a prison housed ; 

Deliberately, and undeceived, 

And there, with many a doleful song 

Those wild men's vices he received, 

Made of wild words, her cup of wrong 

And gave them back his own. 

She fearfully caroused. 

His genius and his moral frame 

Yet sometimes milder hours she knew, 

Were thus impaired, and he became 

Nor wanted sun, nor rain, nor dew, 

The slave of low desires : 

Nor pastimes of the May ; 

A Man who without self-control 

— They all were with her in her cell ; 

Would seek what the degraded soul 

And a clear brook with cheerful knell 

Unworthily admires. 

Did o'er the pebbles play. 

RESOLUTION AND INDEPENDENCE. 

 

When Ruth three seasons thus had lain, 
There came a respite to her pain ; 
She from her prison fled ; 
But of the Vagrant none took thought ; 
And where it liked her best she sought 
Her shelter and her bread. 
Among the fields she breathed again : 
The master-current of her brain 
Ran permanent and free ; 
And, coming to the Banks of Tone, 
There did she rest ; and dwell alone 
Under the greenwood tree. 
The engines of her pain, the tools 
That shaped her sorrow, rocks and pools, 
And airs that gently stir 
The vernal leaves — she loved them still ; 
Nor ever taxed them with the ill 
Which had been done to her. 
A Barn her winter bed supplies ; 
But, till the warmth of summer skies 
And summer days is gone, 
(And all do in this tale agree) 
She sleeps beneath the greenwood tree, 
And other home hath none. 
An innocent life, yet far astray ! 
And Ruth will, long before her day, 
Be broken down and old : 
Sore aches she needs must have ! but less 
Of mind, than body's wretchedness, 
From damp, and rain, and cold. 
If she is prest by want of food, 
She from her dwelling in the wood 
Repairs to a road-side ; 
And there she begs at one steep place 
Where up and down with easy pace 
The horsemen-travellers ride. 
That oaten pipe of hers is mute, 
Or thrown away ; but with a flute 
Her loneliness she cheers : 
This flute, made of a hemlock stalk, 
At evening in his homeward walk 
The Quantock woodman hears. 
I, too, have passed her on the hills 
Setting her little water-mills 
By spouts and fountains wild — 
Such small machinery as she turned 
Ere she had wept, ere she had mourned, 
A young and happy Child ! 

Farewell ! and when thy days are told, 
Ill-fated Ruth, in hallowed mould . 
Thy corpse shah buried be, 
For thee a funeral bell shall ring, 
And all the congregation sing 
A Christian psalm for thee. 

XXII. 
RESOLUTION AND INDEPENDENCE. 
i. 
There was a roaring in the wind all night ; 
The rain came heavily and fell in floods ; 
But now the sun is rising calm and bright ; 
The birds are singing in the distant woods ; 
Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods ; 
The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters ; 
And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters. 
n. 
All things that love the sun are out of doors ; 
The sky rejoices in the morning's birth ; 
The grass is bright with rain-drops; — on the moovs 
The hare is running races in her mirth ; 
And with her feet she from the plashy earth 
Raises a mist ; that, glittering in the sun, 
Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run. 
in. 
I was a Traveller then upon the moor, 
I saw the hare that raced about with joy ; 
I heard the woods and distant waters roar ; 
Or heard them not, as happy as a boy : 
The pleasant season did my heart employ : 
My old remembrances went from me wholly; 
And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy. 
IV. 
But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might 
Of joy in minds that can no further go, 
As high as we have mounted in delight 
In our dejection do we sink as low ; 
To me that morning did it happen so ; 
And fears and fancies thick upon me came ; 
Dim sadness— and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor 
could name. 
v. 
I heard the sky-lark warbling in the sky ; 
And I bethought me of the playful hare : 
Even such a happy Child of earth am I ; 
Even as these blissful creatures do I fare ; 
Far from the world I walk, and from all care ; 
But there may come another day to me — 
Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought, 
As if life's business were a summer mood ; 
As if all needful tilings would come unsought 
To genial faith, still rich in genial good ; 
But how can He expect that others should 
Build for him, sow for him, and at his call 
Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all ? 

I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy, 
The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride ; 
Of Him who walked in glory and in joy 
Following his plough, along the mountain-side : 
By our own spirits are we deified : 
We Poets in our youth begin in gladness ; 
But thereof come in the end despondency and 
madness. 

Now, whether it were hy peculiar grace, 
A leading from above, a something given, 
Yet it befel, that, in this lonely place, 
When I with these untoward thoughts had striven, 
Beside a pool hare to the eye of heaven 
I saw a Man before me unawares : 
The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs. 

As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie 
Couched on the bald top of an eminence ; 
Wonder to all who do the same espy, 
By what means it could thither come, and whence ; 
So that it seems a thing endued with sense : 
Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that on a shelf 
Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself ; 

Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead, 
Nor all asleep — in his extreme old age : 
His body was bent double, feet and head 
Coming together in life's pilgrimage ; 
As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage 
Of sickness felt by him in times long past, 
A more than human weight upon his frame had cast. 

Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, 
Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood : 
And, still as I drew near with gentle pace, 
Upon the margin of that moorish flood 
Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, 
That heareth not the loud winds when they call ; 
And moveth all together, if it move at all. 


At length, himself unsettling, he the pond 
Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look 
Upon the muddy water, which he conned, 
As if he had been reading in a book : 
And now a stranger's privilege I took ; 
And, drawing to his side, to him did say, 
" This morning gives us promise of a glorious day.' 

A gentle answer did the old Man make, 
In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew : 
And him with further words I thus bespake, 
" What occupation do you there pursue  
This is a lonesome place for one like you." 
Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise 
Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes. 

His words came feebly, from a feeble chest, 
But each in solemn order followed each, 
With something of a lofty utterance drest — 
Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach 
Of ordinary men ; a stately speech ; 
Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use, 
Religious men, who give to God and man their dues. 

He told, that to these waters he had come 
To gather leeches, being old and poor : 
Employment hazardous and wearisome ! 
And he had many hardships to endure : 
From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor ; 
Housing, with God's good help, by choice or chance ; 
And in this way he gained an honest maintenance. 

The old Man still stood talking by my side ; 
But now his voice to me was like a stream 
Scarce heard ; nor word from word could I divide ; 
And the whole body of the Man did seem 
Like one whom I had met with in a dream ; 
Or like a man from some far region sent, 
To give me human strength, by apt admonishment. 

My former thoughts returned : the fear that kills ; 
And hope that is unwilling to be fed ; 
Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills ; 
And mighty Poets in their misery dead. 
— Perplexed, and longing to be comforted, 
My question eagerly did I renew, 
" How is it that you five, and what is it you do ?" 

 

THE THOHN. 

 

He with a smile did then his words repeat ; 
And said, that, gathering leeches, far and wide 
He travelled ; stirring thus about his feet 
The waters of the pools where they abide. 
" Once I could meet with them on every side ; 
But they have dwindled long by slow decay ; 
Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may. 

While he was talking thus, the lonely place, 
The old Man's shape, and speech — all troubled me : 
In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace 
About the weary moors continually, 
Wandering about alone and silently. 
While I these thoughts within myself pursued, 
He, having made a pause, the same discourse 
renewed. 

And soon with this he other matter blended, 
Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind, 
j But stately in the main ; and when he ended, 
! I could have laughed myself to scorn to find 
j In that decrepit Man so firm a mind. 
" God," said I, " be my help and stay secure ; 
I ' think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor !' 
. 

XXIII. 
THE THORN. 

" There is a Thorn — it looks so old, 
In truth, you'd find it hard to say 
How it could ever have been young, 
It looks so old and grey. 
Not higher than a two years' child 
It stands erect, this aged Thorn ; 
No leaves it has, no prickly points ; 
It is a mass of knotted joints, 
A wretched thing forlorn. 
It stands erect, and like a stone 
With lichens is it overgrown. 

Like rock or stone, it is o'ergrown, 
With lichens to the very top, 
And hung with heavy tufts of moss, 
A melancholy crop : 
Up from the earth these mosses creep, 

And this poor Thorn they clasp it round 
So close, you 'd say that they are bent 
With plain and manifest intent 
To drag it to the ground ; 
And all have joined in one endeavour 
To bury this poor Thorn for ever. 
in. 
High on a mountain's highest ridge, 
Where oft the stormy winter gale 
Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds 
It sweeps from vale to vale ; 
Not five yards from the mountain path, 
This Thorn you on your left espy ; 
And to the left, three yards beyond, 
You see a little muddy pond 
Of water — never dry 
Though but of compass small, and bare 
To thirsty suns and parching air. 
IV. 
And, close beside this aged Thorn, 
There is a fresh and lovely sight, 
A beauteous heap, a hill of moss, 
Just half a foot in height. 
All lovely colours there you see, 
All colours that were ever seen ; 
And mossy network too is there, 
As if by hand of lady fair 
The work had woven been ; 
And cups, the darlings of the eye, 
So deep is their vermilion dye. 

Ah me ! what lovely tints are there 
Of olive green and scarlet bright, 
In spikes, in branches, and in stars, 
Green, red, and pearly white ! 
This heap of earth o'ergrown with moss, 
Which close beside the Thorn you see, 
So fresh in all its beauteous dyes, 
Is like an infant's grave in size, 
As like as like can be : 
But never, never any where, 
An infant's grave was half so fair. 

Now would you see this aged Thorn, 
This pond, and beauteous hill of moss, 
You must take care and choose your time 
The mountain when to cross. 
For oft there sits between the heap 
So like an infant's grave in size, 
And that same pond of which I spoke, 
A Woman in a scarlet cloak, 

 POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

And to herself she cries, 

XI. 

' Oh misery ! oh misery ! 

And they had fixed the wedding day, 

Oh woe is me ! oh misery ! ' 

The morning that must wed them both ; 

VII. 

But Stephen to another Maid 

At all times of the day and night 

Had sworn another oath ; 

This wretched Woman thither goes ; 

And, with this other Maid, to church 

And she is known to every star, 

Unthinking Stephen went — 

And every wind that hlows ; 

Poor Martha ! on that woeful day 

And there, heside the Thorn, she sits 

A pang of pitiless dismay 

When the blue daylight 's in the skies, 

Into her soul was sent ; 

And when the whirlwind 's on the hill, 

A fire was kindled in her breast, 

Or frosty air is keen and still, 

Which might not burn itself to rest. 

And to herself she cries, 


' Oh misery ! oh misery ! 

XII 

Oh woe is me ! oh misery ! ' " 

They say, full six months after this, 

vii r. 

While yet the summer leaves were green, 

" Now wherefore, thus, by day and night, 

She to the mountain-top would go, 

In rain, in tempest, and in snow, 

And there was often seen. 

Thus to the dreary mountain-top 

What could she seek ? — or wish to hide  

Does this poor Woman go ? 

Her state to any eye was plain ; 

And why sits she beside the Thorn 

She was with child, and she was mad ; 

When the blue daylight 's in the sky 

Yet often was she sober sad 

Or when the whirlwind 's on the hill, 

From her exceeding pain. 

Or frosty air is keen and still, 

guilty Father — would that death 

And wherefore does she cry  — 

Had saved him from that breach of faith ! 

wherefore ? wherefore ? tell me why 


Does she repeat that doleful cry ? " 

xii r. 

IX. 

Sad case for such a brain to hold 

" I cannot tell ; I wish I could ; 

Communion with a stirring child ! 

For the true reason no one knows : 

Sad case, as you may think, for one 

But would you gladly view the spot, 

Who had a brain so wild ! 

The spot to which she goes ; 

Last Christmas-eve we talked of this, 

The hillock like an infant's grave, 

And grey-haired Wilfred of the glen 

The pond — and Thorn, so old and grey ; 

Held that the unborn infant wrought 

Pass by her door — 'tis seldom shut — 

About its mother's heart, and brought 

And, if you see her in her hut — 

Her senses back again : 

Then to the spot away ! 

And, when at last her time drew near, 

I never heard of such as dare 

Her looks were calm, her senses clear. 

Approach the spot when she is there." 


X. 
" But wherefore to the mountain-top 

XIV. 
More know I not, I wish I did, 

Can this unhappy Woman go, 

And it should all be told to you ; 

Whatever star is in the skies, 

For what became of this poor child 

Whatever wind may blow ? " 

No mortal ever knew ; 

" Full twenty years are past and gone 

Nay — if a child to her was born 

Since she (her name is Martha Ray) 

No earthly tongue could ever tell ; 

Gave with a maiden's true good-will 

And if 'twas born alive or dead, 

Her company to Stephen Hill ; 

Far less could this with proof be said; 

And she was blithe and gay, 

But some remember well, 

While friends and kindred all approved 

That Martha Ray about this time 

Of him whom tenderly she loved. 

Would up the mountain often climb. 



THE THORN. 

 

And all that winter, when at night 
The wind blew from the mountain-peak, 
'Twas worth your while, though in the dark, 
The churchyard path to seek : 
For many a time and oft were heard 
Cries coming from the mountain head : 
Some plainly living voices were J 
And others, I 've heard many swear, 
Were voices of the dead : 
I cannot think, whate'er they say, 
They had to do with Martha Ray. 

But that she goes to this old Thorn, 
The Thorn which I described to you, 
And there sits in a scarlet cloak, 
I will be sworn is true. 
For one day with my telescope, 
To view the ocean wide and bright, 
When to this country first I came, 
Ere I had heard of Martha's name, 
I climbed the mountain's height : — 
A storm came on, and I could see 
No object higher than my knee. 

'Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain : 
No screen, no fence could I discover ; 
And then the wind ! in sooth, it was 
A wind full ten times over. 
I looked around, I thought I saw 
A jutting crag, — and off I ran, 
Head-foremost, through the driving rain, 
The shelter of the crag to gain ; 
And, as I am a man, 
Instead of jutting crag, I found 
A Woman seated on the ground. 

I did not speak — I saw her face ; 
Her face ! — it was enough for me ; 
I turned about and heard her cry, 
' Oh misery ! oh misery ! ' 
And there she sits, until the moon 
Through half the clear blue sky will go ; 
And, when the little breezes make 
The waters of the pond to shake, 
As all the country know, 
She shudders, and you hear her cry, 
'Oh misery ! oh misery ! ' " 

" But what 's the Thorn \ and what the pond I 
And what the hill of moss to her ? 
And what the creeping breeze that comes 
The little pond to stir  " 
" I cannot tell ; but some will say 
She hanged her baby on the tree ; 
Some say she drowned it in the pond, 
Which is a little step beyond : 
But all and each agree, 
The little Babe was buried there, 
Beneath that hill of moss so fair. 

I Ve heard, the moss is spotted red 
With drops of that poor infant's blood ; 
But kill a new-born infant thus, 
I do not think she could ! 
Some say, if to the pond you go, 
And fix on it a steady view, 
The shadow of a babe you trace, 
A baby and a baby's face, 
And that it looks at you; 
Whene'er you look on it, 'tis plain 
The baby looks at you again. 

And some had sworn an oath that she 
Should be to public justice brought ; 
And for the little infant's bones 
With spades they would have sought. 
But instantly the hill of moss 
Before their eyes began to stir ! 
And, for full fifty yards around, 
The grass — it shook upon the ground ! 
Yet all do still aver 
The little Babe lies buried there, 
Beneath that hill of moss so fair. 

I cannot tell how this may be 
But plain it is the Thorn is bound 
With heavy tufts of moss that strive 
To drag it to the ground ; 
And this I know, full many a time, 
When she was on the mountain high, 
By day, and in the silent night, 
When all the stars shone clear and bright, 
That I have heard her cry, 
' misery ! oh misery ! 
Oh woe is me ! oh misery ! ' " 
j . 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

HART-LEAP WELL. 
Hart-Leap Well is a small spring of water, about five miles 
from Richmond in Yorkshire, and near the side of the 
road that leads from Richmond to Askrigg. Its name is 
derived from a remarkable Chase, the memory of which 
is preserved by the monuments spoken of in the second 
Part of the following Poem, which monuments do now 
exist as I have there described them. 
The Knight had ridden down from Wensley Moor 
With the slow motion of a summer's cloud 
And now, as he approached a vassal's door, 
" Bring forth another horse ! " he cried aloud. 
"Another horse !" — That shout the vassal heard 
And saddled Ms best Steed, a comely grey ; 
Sir Walter mounted him ; he was the third 
Which he had mounted on that glorious day. 
Joy sparkled in the prancing courser's eyes ; 
The horse and horseman are a happy pair ; 
But, though Sir Walter like a falcon flies, 
There is a doleful silence in the air. 
A rout this morning left Sir Walter's Hall, 
That as they galloped made the echoes roar ; 
But horse and man are vanished, one and all ; 
Such race, I think, was never seen before. 
Sir Walter, restless as a veering wind, 
Calls to the few tired dogs that yet remain : 
. Blanch, Swift, and Music, noblest of their kind, 
Follow, and up the weary mountain strain. 
The Knight hallooed, he cheered and chid them on 
With suppliant gestures and upbraidings stern ; 
But breath and eyesight fail ; and, one by one, 
The dogs are stretched among the mountain fern. 
Where is the throng, the tumult of the race ? 
The bugles that so joyfully were blown? 
— This chase it looks not like an earthly chase ; 
Sir Walter and the Hart are left alone. 
The poor Hart toils along the mountain-side ; 
I will not stop to tell how far he fled, 
Nor will I mention by what death he died ; 
But now the Knight beholds him lying dead. 
Dismounting, then, he leaned against a thorn ; 
He had no follower, dog, nor man, nor boy : 
He neither cracked his whip, nor blew his horn, 
But gazed upon the spoil with silent joy. 

Close to the thorn on which Sir Walter leaned, 
Stood his dumb partner in this glorious feat ; 
Weak as a lamb the hour that it is yeaned ; 
And white with foam as if with cleaving sleet. 
Upon his side the Hart was lying stretched : 
His nostril touched a spring beneath a hill, 
And with the last deep groan his breath had fetcl 
The waters of the spring were trembling still. 
And now, too happy for repose or rest, 
(Never had living man such joyful lot !) 
Sir Walter walked all round, north, south, and west 
And gazed and gazed upon that darling spot. 
And climbing up the hill — (it was at least 
Four roods of sheer ascent) Sir Walter found 
Three several hoof-marks which the hunted Be 
Had left imprinted on the grassy ground. 
Sir Walter wiped his face, and cried, " Till now 
Such sight was never seen by human eyes : 
Three leaps have borne him from this lofty brow 
Down to the very fountain where he lies. 
I ' build a pleasure-house upon this spot, 
And a small arbour, made for rural joy ; 
'Twill be the traveller's shed, the pilgrim's cot, 
A place of love for damsels that are coy. 
A cunning artist will I have to frame 
A basin for that fountain in the dell ! 
And they who do make mention of the same, 
From this day forth, shall call it Hart-leap Wel 
And, gallant Stag ! to make thy praises known, 
Another monument shall here be raised ; 
Three several pillars, each a rough-hewn stone, 
And planted where thy hoofs the turf have graze 
And, in the summer-time when days are long, 
I will come hither with my Paramour ; 
And with the dancers and the minstrel's song 
We will make merry in that pleasant bower. 
Till the foundations of the mountains fail 
My mansion with its arbour shall endure ; — 
The joy of them who till the fields of Swale, 
And them who dwell among the woods of Ure !" 
Then home he went, and left the Hart, stone-dea 
With breathless nostrils stretched above the spring 
— Soon did the Knight perform what he had said 
And far and wide the fame thereof did ring. 

HART-LEAP WELL. 

is; 

lire thrice the Moon into her port had steered, 
V cup of stone received the living well ; 
L'hree pillars of rude stone Sir Walter reared, 
^.nd built a house of pleasure in the dell. 
And near the fountain, flowers of stature tall 
With trailing plants and trees were intertwined,- 
Which soon composed a little sylvan hall, 
A leafy shelter from the sun and wind. 
And thither, when the summer days were long 
sir Walter led his wondering Paramour ; 
nd with the dancers and the minstrel's song 
ade merriment within that pleasant bower. 
The Knight, Sir Walter, died in course of time, 
And his bones he in his paternal vale. — 
ut there is matter for a second rhyme, 
And I to this would add another tale. 

PART SECOND. 
The moving accident is not my trade ; 
To freeze the blood I have no ready arts : 
Tis my delight, alone in summer shade, 
To pipe a simple song for thinking hearts. 
As I from Hawes to Richmond did repair, 
It chanced that I saw standing in a dell 
Three aspens at three corners of a square ; 
And one, not four yards distant, near a well. 
What this imported I could ill divine : 
And, pulling now the rein my horse to stop, 
I saw three pillars standing in a line, — 
: The last stone-pillar on a dark hill-top. 
The trees were grey, with neither arms nor head 
Half wasted the square mound of tawny green ; 
So that you just might say, as then I said, 
" Here in old time the hand of man hath been." 
I looked upon the hill both far and near, 
More doleful place did never eye survey ; 
It seemed as if the spring-time came not here, 
And Nature here were willing to decay. 
I stood in various thoughts and fancies lost, 
When one, who was in shepherd's garb attired, 
Came up the hollow : — him did I accost, 
And what this place might be I then inquired. 

The Shepherd stopped, and that same story told 
Which in my former rhyme I have rehearsed. 
" A jolly place," said he, " in times of old ! 
But something ails it now : the spot is curst. 
You see these lifeless stumps of aspen wood — 
Some say that they are beeches, others elms — 
These were the bower ; and here a mansion stood, 
The finest palace of a hundred realms ! 
The arbour does its own condition tell ; 
You see the stones, the fountain, and the stream ; 
But as to the great Lodge ! you might as well 
Hunt half a day for a forgotten dream. 
There 's neither dog nor heifer, horse nor sheep, 
Will wet his lips within that cup of stone ; 
And oftentimes, when all are fast asleep, 
This water doth send forth a dolorous groan. 
Some say that here a murder has been done, 
And blood cries out for blood : but, for my part, 
I 've guessed, when I've been sitting in the sun, 
That it was all for that unhappy Hart. 
What thoughts must through the creature's brain 
have past ! 
Even from the topmost stone, upon the steep, 
Are but tln'ee bounds — and look, Sir, at this last — 
O Master ! it has been a cruel leap. 
For thirteen hours he ran a desperate race ; 
And in my simple mind we cannot tell 
What cause the Hart might have to love this place, 
And come and make his death-bed near the well. 
Here on the grass perhaps asleep he sank, 
Lulled by the fountain in the summer-tide ; 
This water was perhaps the first he drank 
When he had wandered from his mother's side. 
In April here beneath the flowering thorn 
He heard the birds their morning carols sing ; 
And he, perhaps, for aught we know, was born 
Not hah a furlong from that self-same spring. 
Now, here is neither grass nor pleasant shade ; 
The sun on drearier hollow never shone ; 
So will it be, as I have often said, 
Till trees, and stones, and fountain, all are gone." 
" Grey-headed Shepherd, thou hast spoken well ; 
Small difference lies between thy creed and mine : 
This Beast not unobserved by Nature fell ; 
His death was mourned by sympathy divine. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

The Being, that is in the clouds and air, 
That is in the green leaves among the groves, 
Maintains a deep and reverential care 
For the unoffending creatures whom he loves. 
The pleasure-house is dust : — behind, before, 
This is no common waste, no common gloom ; 
But Nature, in due course of time, once more 
Shall here put on her beauty and her bloom. 
She leaves these objects to a slow decay, 
That what we are, and have been, may be known ; 
But at the coming of the milder day, 
These monuments shall all be overgrown. 
One lesson, Shepherd, let us two divide, 
Taught both by what she shows, and what conceals; 
Never to blend our pleasure or our pride 
With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels." 

SONG AT THE FEAST OF BROUGHAM 
CASTLE, 
UPON THE RESTORATION OP LORD CLIFFORD, THE SHEP- 
HERD, TO THE ESTATES AND HONOURS OF HIS 
ANCESTORS. 
High in the breathless Hall the Minstrel sate, 
And Emont's murmur mingled with the Song. — 
The words of ancient time I thus translate, 
A festal strain that hath been silent long : — 
" From town to town, from tower to tower, 
The red rose is a gladsome flower. 
Her thirty years of winter past, 
The red rose is revived at last ; 
She lifts her head for endless spring, 
For everlasting blossoming : 
Both roses flourish, red and white : 
In love and sisterly delight 
The two that were at strife are blended, 
And all old troubles now are ended.- — 
Joy ! joy to both ! but most to her 
Who is the flower of Lancaster ! 
Behold her how She smiles to-day 
On this great throng, this bright array ! 
Fair greeting doth she send to all 
From every corner of the hall ; 
But chiefly from above the board 
Where sits in state our rightful Lord, 
A Clifford to his own restored ! 

They came with banner, spear, and shield ; 
And it was proved in Bosworth-field. 
Not long the Avenger was withstood — 
Earth helped him with the cry of blood : 
St. George was for us, and the might 
Of blessed Angels crowned the right. 
Loud voice the Land has uttered forth, 
We loudest in the faithful north : 
Our fields rejoice, our mountains ring, 
Our streams proclaim a welcoming ; 
Our strong-abodes and castles see 
The glory of their loyalty. 
How glad is Skipton at this hour — 
Though lonely, a deserted Tower ; 
Knight, squire, and yeoman, page and groom 
We have them at the feast of Brough'm. 
How glad Pendragon — though the sleep 
Of years be on her ! — She shall reap 
A taste of this great pleasure, viewing 
As in a dream her own renewing. 
Rejoiced is Brough, right glad I deem 
Beside her little humble stream ; 
And she that keepeth watch and ward 
Her statelier Eden's course to guard ; 
They both are happy at this hour, 
Though each is but a lonely Tower : — • 
But here is perfect joy and pride 
For one fair House by Emont's side, 
This day, distinguished without peer 
To see her Master and to cheer — 
Him, and his Lady-mother dear ! 
Oh ! it was a time forlorn 
When the fatherless was born — 
Give her wings that she may fly, 
Or she sees her infant die ! 
Swords that are with slaughter wild 
Hunt the Mother and the Child. 
Who will take them from the light ? 
— Yonder is a man in sight — 
Yonder is a house — but where ? 
No, they must not enter there. 
To the caves, and to the brooks, 
To the clouds of heaven she looks ; 
She is speechless, but her eyes 
Pray in ghostly agonies. 
Blissful Mary, Mother mild, 
Maid and Mother undefiled, 
Save a Mother and her Child ! 
Now Who is he that bounds with joy 
On Carrock's side, a Shepherd-boy  
No thoughts hath he but thoughts that pass 
Light as the wind along the grass. 

SONG AT THE FEAST OF BROUGHAM CASTLE. 

 

Can this be He who hither came 
In secret, like a smothered flame ? 
O'er whom such thankful tears were shed 
For shelter, and a poor man's bread ! 
God loves the Child ; and God hath willed 
That those dear words should be fulfilled, 
The Lady's words, when forced away 
The last she to her Babe did say : 
' My own, my own, thy Fellow-guest 
I may not be ; but rest thee, rest, 
For lowly shepherd's life is best !' 
Alas ! when evil men are strong 
No life is good, no pleasure long. 
The Boy must part from Mosedale's groves, 
And leave Blencathara's rugged coves, 
And quit the flowers that summer brings 
To Glenderainakin's lofty springs ; 
Must vanish, and his careless cheer 
Be turned to heaviness and fear. 
— Give Sir Lancelot Threlkeld praise ! 
Hear it, good man, old in days ! 
Thou tree of covert and of rest 
For this young Bird that is distrest ; 
Among thy branches safe he lay, 
And he was free to sport and play, 
When falcons were abroad for prey. 
A recreant harp, that sings of fear 
And heaviness in Clifford's ear ! 
I said, when evil men are strong, 
No life is good, no pleasure long, 
A weak and cowardly untruth ! 
Our Clifford was a happy Youth, 
And thankful through a weary time, 
That brought him up to manhood's prime. 
— Again he wanders forth at will, 
And tends a flock from hill to hill : 
His garb is humble ; ne'er was seen 
Such garb with such a noble mien ; 
Among the shepherd grooms no mate 
Hath he, a Child of strength and state ! 
Yet lacks not friends for simple glee, 
Nor yet for higher sympathy. 
To his side the fallow-deer 
Came, and rested without fear ; 
The eagle, lord of land and sea, 
Stooped down to pay him fealty ; 
And both the undying fish that swim 
Through Bowscale-tarn did wait on him ; 
The pair were servants of his eye 
In their immortality ; 
And glancing, glea ming , dark or bright, 
Moved to and fro, for his delight. 

He knew the rocks which Angels haunt 
Upon the mountains visitant ; 
He hath kenned them taking wing : 
And into caves where Faeries sing 
He hath entered ; and been told 
By Voices how men lived of old. 
Among the heavens his eye can see 
The face of thing that is to be ; 
And, if that men report him right, 
His tongue could whisper words of might. 
■ — Now another day is come, 
Fitter hope, and nobler doom ; 
He hath thrown aside his crook, 
And hath buried deep his book ; 
Armour rusting in his halls 
On the blood of Clifford calls ; — 
• Quell the Scot,' exclaims the Lance — 
Bear me to the heart of France, 
Is the longing of the Shield — 
Tell thy name, thou trembling Field ; 
Field of death, where'er thou be, 
Groan thou with our victory ! 
Happy day, and mighty hour, 
When our Shepherd, in his power, 
Mailed and horsed, with lance and sword, 
To his ancestors restored 
Like a re-appearing Star, 
Like a glory from afar, 
First shall head the flock of war ! " 
Alas ! the impassioned minstrel did not know 
How, by Heaven's grace, this Clifford's heart was 
framed : 
How he, long forced in humble walks to go, 
Was softened into feeling, soothed, and tamed. 
Love had he found in huts where poor men he ; 
His daily teachers had been woods and rills, 
The silence that is in the starry sky, 
The sleep that is among the lonely hills. 
In him the savage virtue of the Race, 
Revenge, and all ferocious thoughts were dead : 
Nor did he change ; but kept in lofty place 
The wisdom which adversity had bred. 
Glad were the vales, and every cottage-hearth ; 
The Shepherd-lord was honoured more and more ; 
And, ages after he was laid in earth, 
u The good Lord Clifford" was the name he bore. 
J . 

ico 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

LINES, 
COMPOSED A FEW MILES ABOVE TINTERN ABBEY, QN 
REVISITING THE BANKS OF THE WYE 
DURING A TOUR. 
JULY , . 
Five years have past; five summers, with the length 
Of five long winters ! and again I hear 
These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs 
With a soft inland murmur . — Once again 
Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs, 
That on a wild secluded scene impress 
Thoughts of more deep seclusion ; and connect 
The landscape with the quiet of the sky. 
The day is come when I again repose 
Here, under this dark sycamore, and view 
These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts, 
Which at this season, with their unripe fruits, 
Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves 
'Mid groves and copses. Once again I see 
These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines 
Of sportive wood run wild : these pastoral farms, 
Green to the very door ; and wreaths of smoke 
Sent up, in silence, from among the trees ! 
With some uncertain notice, as might seem 
Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods, 
Or of some Hermit's cave, where by his fire 
The Hermit sits alone. 
These beauteous forms, 
Through a long absence, have not been to me 
As is a landscape to a blind man's eye : 
But oft, in lonely rooms, and 'mid the din 
Of towns and cities, I have owed to them 
In hours of weariness, sensations sweet, 
Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart ; 
And passing even into my purer mind, 
With tranquil restoration : — feelings too 
Of unremembered pleasure : such, perhaps, 
As have no slight or trivial influence 
On that best portion of a good man's life, 
His little, nameless, unremembered, acts 
Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust, 
To them I may have owed another gift, 
Of aspect more sublime ; that blessed mood, 
In which the burthen of the mystery, 
In which the heavy and the weary weight 
Of all this unintelligible world, 
Is lightened : — that serene and blessed mood, 

 The river is not affected by the tides a few miles above 
Tintern. 

In which the affections gently lead us on, — 
Until, the breath of this corporeal frame 
And even the motion of our human blood 
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep 
In body, and become a living soul : 
While with an eye made quiet by the power 
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy, 
We see into the life of things. 
If this 
Be but a vain belief, yet, oh ! how oft — 
In darkness and amid the many shapes 
Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir 
Unprofitable, and the fever of the world, 
Have hung upon the beatings of my heart — 
How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee, 
sylvan Wye ! thou wanderer thro' the woods, 
How often has my spirit turned to thee ! 
And now, with gleams of half-extinguished 
thought, 
With many recognitions dim and faint, 
And somewhat of a sad perplexity, 
The picture of the mind revives again : 
While here I stand, not only with the sense 
Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts 
That in this moment there is life and food 
For future years. And so I dare to hope, 
Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when 
first 
 came among these hills ; when like a roe 
I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides 
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams, 
Wherever nature led : more like a man 
Flying from something that he dreads, than one 
Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then 
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days, 
And their glad animal movements all gone by) 
To me was all in all. — I cannot paint 
What then I was. The sounding cataract 
Haunted me like a passion : the tall rock, 
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, 
Their colours and their forms, were then to me 
An appetite ; a feeling and a love, 
That had no need of a remoter charm, 
By thought supplied, nor any interest 
Unborrowed from the eye.— That time is past, 
And all its aching joys are now no more, 
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this 
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur ; other gifts 
Have followed ; for such loss, I would believe, 
Abundant recompence. For I have learned 
To look on nature, not as in the hour 
Of thoughtless youth ; but hearing oftentimes 
The still, sad music of humanity, 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power 
To chasten and subdue. And I have felt 
A presence that disturbs me with the joy 
Of elevated thoughts ; a sense sublime 
Of something far more deeply interfused, 
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns, 
And the round ocean and the living air, 
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man : 
A motion and a spirit, that impels 
All thinking things, all objects of all thought, 
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still 
A lover of the meadows and the woods, 
And mountains ; and of all that we behold 
From this green earth ; of all the mighty world 
Of eye, and ear, — both what they half create , 
And what perceive ; well pleased to recognise 
In nature and the language of the sense, 
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse, 
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul 
Of aU my moral being. 
Nor perchance, 
If I were not thus taught, should I the more 
Suffer my genial spirits to decay : 
For thou art with me here upon the banks 
Of this fair river ; thou my dearest Friend, 
My dear, dear Friend ; and in thy voice I catch 
The language of my former heart, and read 
My former pleasures in the shooting lights 
Of thy wild eyes. Oh ! yet a little while 
May I behold in thee what I was once, 
My dear, dear Sister ! and this prayer I make, 
Knowing that Nature never did betray 
The heart that loved her ; 'tis her privilege, 
Through all the years of this our life, to lead 
From joy to joy : for she can so inform 
The mind that is within us, so impress 
With quietness and beauty, and so feed 
With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues, 
I Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men, 
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all 
! The dreary intercourse of daily life, 
Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb 
Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold 
Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon 
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk ; 
And let the misty mountain-winds be free 
' To blow against thee : and, in after years, 
When these wild ecstasies shall be matured 
< Into a sober pleasure ; when thy mind 
I Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms, 
J Thy memory be as a dwelling-place 

 This line has a close resemblance to an admirable line 
of Young's the exact expression of which I do not recollect. 

For all sweet sounds and harmonies ; oh ! then, 
If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief, 
Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts 
Of tender joy wilt thou remember me, 
And these my exhortations ! Nor, perchance — 
If I should be where I no more can hear 
Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams 
Of past existence — wilt thou then forget 
That on the banks of this delightful stream 
We stood together ; and that I, so long 
A worshipper of Nature, hither came 
Unwearied in that service : rather say 
With warmer love — oh ! with far deeper zeal 
Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget, 
That after many wanderings, many years 
Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs, 
And this green pastoral landscape, were to me 
More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake ! 
/U. 


XXVII. 
It is no Spirit who from heaven hath flown, 
And is descending on his embassy ; 
Nor Traveller gone from earth the heavens to espy ! 
'Tis Hesperus — there he stands with glittering 
crown, 
First admonition that the sun is down ! 
For yet it is broad day-light : clouds pass by ; 
A few are near him still — and now the sky, 
He hath it to himself— 'tis all his own. 
most ambitious Star ! an inquest wrought 
Within me when I recognised thy light ; 
A moment I was startled at the sight : 
And, while I gazed, there came to me a thought 
That I might step beyond my natural race 
As thou seem'st now to do ; might one day trace 
Some ground not mine ; and, strong her strength 
above, 
My Soul, an Apparition in the place, 
Tread there with steps that no one shall reprove ! 
S. 

FRENCH REVOLUTION, 
AS IT APPEARED TO ENTHUSIASTS AT ITS COMMENCEMENT . 
REPRINTED FROM "THE FRIEND." 
Oh ! pleasant exercise of hope and joy ! 
For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood 
 This and the Extract, page , and the first Piece of 
this Class are from the unpublished Poem of which some 
account is given in the Preface to the Excursion. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Upon our side, we who were strong in love ! 
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, 
But to be young was very heaven ! — Oh ! times, 
In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways 
Of custom, law, and statute, took at once 
The attraction of a country in romance ! 
When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights, 
When most intent on making of herself 
A prime Enchantress— to assist the work, 
Which then was going forward in her name ! 
Not favoured spots alone, but the whole earth, 
The beauty wore of promise, that which sets 
(As at some moment might not be unfelt 
Among the bowers of paradise itself) 
The budding rose above the rose full blown. 
What temper at the prospect did not wake 
To happiness unthought of? The inert 
Were roused, and lively natures rapt away ! 
They who had fed their childhood upon dreams, 
The playfellows of fancy, who had made 
All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength 
Their ministers, — who in lordly wise had stirred 
Among the grandest objects of the sense, 
And dealt with whatsoever they found there 
As if they had within some lurking right 
To wield it ; — they, too, who, of gentle mood, 
Had watched all gentle motions, and to these 
Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more mild, 
And in the region of then.' peaceful selves ; — 
Now was it that both found, the meek and lofty 
Did both find, helpers to their heart's desire, 
And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish ; 
Were called upon to exercise their skill, 
Not in Utopia, subterranean fields, 
Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where ! 
But in the very world, which is the world 
Of all of us, — the place where in the end 
We find our happiness, or not at all ! 
. 

Yes, it was the mountain Echo, 
Solitary, clear, profound, 
Answering to the shouting Cuckoo, 
Giving to her sound for sound ! 
Unsolicited reply 
To a babbling wanderer sent ; 
Like her ordinary cry, 
Like — but oh, how different ! 
Hears not also mortal Life? 
Hear not we, unthinking Creatures ! 

Slaves of folly, love, or strife — 
Voices of two different natures  
Have not we too ? — yes, we have 
Answers, and we know not whence ; 
Echoes from beyond the grave, 
Recognised intelligence ! 
Such rebounds our inward ear 
Catches sometimes from afar — 
Listen, ponder, hold them dear ; 
For of God, — of God they are. 

TO A SKY-LARK. 
Ethereal minstrel ! pilgrim of the sky ! 
lost thou despise the earth where cares abound ? 
Or, while the wings aspire, are heart and eye 
Both with thy nest upon the dewy ground ? 
Thy nest which thou canst drop into at will, 
Those quivering wings composed, that music 
still! 
Leave to the nightingale her shady wood; 
A privacy of glorious light is thine; 
Whence thou dost pour upon the world a flood 
Of harmony, with instinct more divine ; 
Type of the wise who soar, but never roam; 
True to the kindred points of Heaven and Home ! 

LAODAMIA. 

« 'With sacrifice before the rising morn 
Vows have I made by limitless hope inspired ; 
And from the infernal Gods, 'mid shades forlorn 
Of night, my slaughtered Lord have I required : 
Celestial pity I again implore ; — 
Restore him to my sight — great Jove, restore !" 
So speaking, and by fervent love endowed 
With faith, the Suppliant heavenward lifts her hands ; 
While, like the sun emerging from a cloud, 
Her countenance brightens — and her eye expands ; 
Her bosom heaves and spreads, her stature grows ; 
And she expects the issue in repose. 

LA OD AMI A. 

 

b terror! what hath she perceived? — joy ! 
What doth she look on ?— whom doth she behold ? 
Her Hero slain upon the beach of Troy ? 
His vital presence ? his corporeal mould ? 
[t is — if sense deceive her not — 'tis He ! 
And a God leads him, winged Mercury ! 
Mild Hermes spake— and touched her with his 
wand 
That calms all fear ; "Such grace hath crowned 
thy prayer, 
Laodamia ! that at Jove's command 
Thy Husband walks the paths of upper air : 
He comes to tarry with thee three hours' space ; 
Accept the gift, behold him face to face ! " 
Forth sprang the impassioned Queen her Lord to 

Again that consummation she essayed ; 
But unsubstantial Form eludes her grasp 
As often as that eager grasp was made. 
The Phantom parts — but parts to re-unite, 
And re-assume his place before her sight. 
" Protesilaus, lo ! thy guide is gone ! 
Confirm, I pray, the vision with thy voice : 
This is our palace,— yonder is thy throne ; 
Speak, and the floor thou tread'st on will rejoice. 
Not to appal me have the gods bestowed 
This precious boon ; and blest a sad abode." 
'•' Great Jove, Laodamia ! doth not leave 
His gifts imperfect : — Spectre though I be, 
I am not sent to scare thee or deceive ; 
But in reward of thy fidelity. 
And something also did my worth obtain ; 
For fearless virtue bringeth boundless gain. 
Thou knowest, the Delphic oracle foretold 
That the first Greek who touched the Trojan strand 
Should die ; but me the threat could not withhold : 
A generous cause a victim did demand ; 
And forth I leapt upon the sandy plain ; . 
A self-devoted chief — by Hector slain." 
" Supreme of Heroes — bravest, noblest, best ! 
Thy matchless courage I bewail no more, 
Which then, when tens of thousands were deprest 
By doubt, propelled thee to the fatal shore ; 
Thou found'st— and I forgive thee — here thou art — 
A nobler counsellor than my poor heart. 

But thou, though capable of sternest deed, 
Wert kind as resolute, and good as brave ; 
And he, whose power restores thee, hath decreed 
Thou should'st elude the malice of the grave : 
Redundant are thy locks, thy lips as fair 
As when their breath enriched Thessalian air. 
No Spectre greets me, — no vain Shadow this ; 
Come, blooming Hero, place thee by my side ! 
Give, on this well known couch, one nuptial kiss 
To me, this day, a second time thy bride ! " 
Jove frowned in heaven : the conscious Parcae 
threw 
Upon those roseate lips a Stygian hue. 
" This visage tells thee that my doom is past : 
Nor should the change be mourned, even if the 
Of sense were able to return as fast 
And surely as they vanish. Earth destroys 
Those raptures duly — Erebus disdains : 
Calm pleasures there abide — majestic pains. 
Be taught, faithful Consort, to control 
Rebellious passion : for the Gods approve 
The depth, and not the tumult, of the soul ; 
A fervent, not ungovernable, love. 
Thy transports moderate ; and meekly mourn 
When I depart, for brief is my sojourn — " 
" Ah, wherefore  — Did not Hercules by force 
Wrest from the guardian Monster of the tomb 
Alcestis, a reanimated corse, 
Given back to dwell on earth in vernal bloom ? 
Medea's spells dispersed the weight of years, 
And ^Eson stood a youth 'mid youthful peers. 
The Gods to us are merciful— and they 
Yet further may relent : for mightier far 
Than strength of nerve and sinew, or the sway 
Of magic potent over sun and star, 
Is love, though oft to agony distrest, 
And though his favourite seat be feeble woman's 
breast. 
But if thou goest, I follow — " "Peace !" he said,— 
She looked upon him and was calmed and cheered; 
The ghastly colour from his lips had fled ; 
In his deportment, shape, and mien, appeared 
Elysian beauty, melancholy grace, 
Brought from a pensive though a happy place. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

~ 

He spake of love, such love as Spirits feel 
In worlds whose course is equable and pure ; 
No fears to heat away — no strife to heal— 
The past unsighed for, and the future sure; 
Spake of heroic arts in graver mood 
Revived, with finer harmony pursued ; 
Of all that is most beauteous — imaged there 
In happier beauty ; more pellucid streams, 
An ampler ether, a diviner air, 
And fields invested with purpureal gleams ; 
Climes which the sun, who sheds the brightest day 
Earth knows, is all unworthy to survey. 
Yet there the Soul shall enter which hath earned 
That privilege by virtue. — " ," said he, 
" The end of man's existence I discerned, 
Who from ignoble games and revelry 
Could draw, when we had parted, vain delight, 
While tears were thy best pastime, day and night; 
And while my youthful peers before my eyes 
(Each hero following his peculiar bent) 
Prepared themselves for glorious enterprise 
By martial sports, — or, seated in the tent, 
Chieftains and kings in council were detained ; 
What time the fleet at Aulis lay enchained. 
The wished-for wind was given : — I then revolved 
The oracle, upon the silent sea ; 
And, if no worthier led the way, resolved 
That, of a thousand vessels, mine should be 
The foremost prow in pressing to the strand, — 
Mine the first blood that tinged the Trojan sand. 
Yet bitter, oft-times bitter, was the pang 
When of thy loss I thought, beloved Wife ! 
On thee too fondly did my memory hang, 
And on the j oys we shared in mortal life, — 
The paths which we had trod — these fountains, 
flowers ; 
My new-planned cities, and unfinished towers. 
But should suspense permit the Foe to cry, 
' Behold they tremble ! — haughty their array, 
Yet of their number no one dares to die ? ' 
In soul I swept the indignity away : 
Old frailties then recurred : — but lofty thought, 
In act embodied, my deliverance wrought. 

And Thou, though strong in love, act all too weak 
In reason, in self-government too slow; 
I counsel thee by fortitude to seek 
Our blest re-union in the shades below. 
The invisible world with thee hath sympathised • 
Be thy affections raised and solemnised. 
Learn, by a mortal yearning, to ascend — 
Seeking a higher object. Love was given, 
Encouraged, sanctioned, chiefly for that end : 
For this the passion to excess was driven — 
That self might be annulled : her bondage prove 
The fetters of a dream, opposed to love." 
Aloud she shrieked ! for Hermes re-appears ! 
Round the dear Shade she would have clung — 'tis 
vain : 
The hours are past — too brief had they been years : 
And him no mortal effort can detain : 
Swift, toward the realms that know not earthly dav. 
He through the portal takes his silent way, 
And on the palace-floor a lifeless corse She lay. 
Thus, all in vain exhorted and reproved, 
She perished ; and, as for a wilful crime, 
By the just Gods whom no weak pity moved, 
Was doomed to wear out her appointed time, 
Apart from happy Ghosts, that gather flowers 
Of blissful quiet 'mid unfading bowers. 
— Yet tears to human suffering are due ; 
And mortal hopes defeated and o'erthrown 
Are mourned by man, and not by man alone, 
As fondly he believes. — Upon the side 
Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained) 
A knot of spiry trees for ages grew 
From out the tomb of him for whom she died ; 
And ever, when such stature they had gained 
That Ilium's walls were subject to their view, 
The trees' tall summits withered at the sight ; 
A constant interchange of growth and blight ! 
. 

 For the account of these long-lived trees, see Pliny' 
Natural History, lib. xvi. cap. . ; and for the features i) 
the character of Protesilaus see the Iphigenia in Aulis o 
Euripides. "Virgil places the Shade of Laodamia in i 
mournful region, among unhappy Lovers, 
His Laodamia 
It Comes.. . 

DION. 

. 

XXXII. 
DION. 
(SEE PLOTABCH). 
. 
Serene, and fitted to embrace, 
Where'er he turned, a swan-like grace 
Of haughtiness without pretence, 
And to unfold a still magnificence, 
Was princely Dion, in the power 
And beauty of his happier hour. 
And what pure homage then did wait 
On Dion's virtues, while the lunar beam 
Of Plato's genius, from its lofty sphere, 
Fell round him in the grove of Academe, 
Softening their inbred dignity austere — 
That he, not too elate 
With self-sufficing solitude, 
But with majestic lowliness endued, 
Might in the universal bosom reign, 
And from affectionate observance gain 
Help, under every change of adverse fate. 

Five thousand warriors — the rapturous day ! 
Each crowned with flowers, and armed with spear 
and shield, 
Or ruder weapon which their course might yield, 
To Syracuse advance in bright array. 
Who leads them on? — The anxious people see 
Long-exiled Dion marching at their head, 
He also crowned with flowers of Sicily, 
And in a white, far-beaming, corslet clad ! 
Pure transport undisturbed by doubt or fear 
The gazers feel ; and, rushing to the plain, 
Salute those strangers as a holy train 
Or blest procession (to the Immortals dear) 
That brought their precious liberty again. 
Lo ! when the gates are entered, on each hand, 
Down the long street, rich goblets filled with wine 
In seemly order stand, 
On tables set, as if for rites divine ; — 
And, as the great Deliverer marches by, 
He looks on festal ground with fruits bestrown ; 
And flowers are on his person thrown 
In boundless prodigality ; 
Nor doth the general voice abstain from prayer, 
Invoking Dion's tutelary care, 
As if a very Deity he were ! 

Mourn, hills and groves of Attica ! and mourn 
Ilissus, bending o'er thy classic urn ! 

Mourn, and lament for him whose spirit dreads 
Your once sweet memory, studious walks and 
shades ! 
For him who to divinity aspired, 
Not on the breath of popular applause, 
But through dependence on the sacred laws 
Framed in the schoojs where Wisdom dwelt retired, 
Intent to trace the ideal path of right 
(More fair than heaven's broad causeway paved 
with stars) 
Which Dion learned to measure with sublime 
delight ; — 
But He hath overleaped the eternal bars ; 
And, following guides whose craft holds no consent 
With aught that breathes the ethereal element, 
Hath stained the robes of civil power with blood, 
Unjustly shed, though for the public good. 
Whence doubts that came too late, and wishes vain, 
Hollow excuses, and triumphant pain ; 
And oft his cogitations sink as low 
As, through the abysses of a joyless heart, 
The heaviest plummet of despair can go- 
But whence that sudden check  that fearful start ! 
He hears an uncouth sound — 
Anon his lifted eyes 
Saw, at a long-drawn gallery's dusky bound, 
A Shape of more than mortal size 
And hideous aspect, stalking round and round ! 
A woman's garb the Phantom wore, 
And fiercely swept the marble floor, — 
Like Auster whirling to and fro, 
His force on Caspian foam to try ; 
Or Boreas when he scours the snow 
That skins the plains of Thessaly, 
Or when aloft on Maenalus he stops 
His flight, 'mid eddying pine-tree tops ! 

So, but from toil less sign of profit reaping, 
The sullen Spectre to her purpose bowed, 
Sweeping — vehemently sweeping — 
No pause admitted, no design avowed ! 
u Avaunt, inexplicable Guest ! — a vaunt," 
Exclaimed the Chieftain — " let me rather see 
The coronal that coiling vipers make ; 
The torch that flames with many a lurid flake, 
And the long train of doleful pageantry 
Which they behold, whom vengeful Furies haunt ; 
Who, while they struggle from the scourge to flee, 
Move where the blasted soil is not unworn, 
And, in their anguish, bear what other minds have 
borne !" 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

But Shapes that come not at an earthly call, 
Will not depart when mortal voices bid ; 
Lords of the visionary eye whose lid, 
Once raised, remains aghast, and will not fall ! 
Ye Gods, thought He, that servile Implement 
Obeys a mystical intent ! 
Your Minister would brush away 
The spots that to my soul adhere ; 
But should she labour night and day, 
They will not, cannot disappear ; 
Whence angry perturbations, — and that look 
Winch no Philosophy can brook ! 

Ill-fated Chief ! there are whose hopes are built 
Upon the ruins of thy glorious name ; 
Who, through the portal of one moment's guilt, 
Pursue thee with their deadly aim ! 
O matchless perfidy ! portentous lust 
Of monstrous crime ! — that horror-striking blade, 
Drawn in defiance of the Gods, hath laid 
The noble Syracusan low in dust ! 
Shudder'd the walls — the marble city wept — 
And sylvan places heaved a pensive sigh ; 
But in calm peace the appointed Victim slept, 
As he had fallen in magnanimity ; 
Of spirit too capacious to require 
That Destiny her course should change ; too just 
To his own native greatness to desire 
That wretched boon, days lengthened by mistrust. 
So were the hopeless troubles, that involved 
The soul of Dion, instantly dissolved. 
Released from life and cares of princely state, 
He left this moral grafted on his Fate ; 
' Him only pleasure leads, and peace attends, 
Him, only him, the shield of Jove defends, 
Whose means are fair and spotless as his ends.' 
SG. 

XXXIII. 
THE PASS OF KIRKSTONE. 
i. 
Within the mind strong fancies work, 
A deep delight the bosom thrills, 
Oft as I pass along the fork 
Of these fraternal hills : 
Where, save the rugged road, we find 
No appanage of human kind, 
Nor hint of man ; if stone or rock 
Seem not his handy- work to mock 
By something cognizably shaped ; 



Mockery — or model roughly hewn, 
And left as if by earthquake strewn, 
Or from the Flood escaped : 
Altars for Druid service fit ; 
(But where no fire was ever lit, 
Unless the glow-worm to the skies 
Thence offer nightly sacrifice) 
Wrinkled Egyptian monument ; 
Green moss-grown tower ; or hoary tent ; 
Tents of a camp that never shall be razed— 
On which four thousand years have gazed ! 
n. 
Ye plough-shares sparkling on the slopes ! 
Ye snow-white lambs that trip 
Imprisoned 'mid the formal props 
Of restless ownership ! 
Ye trees, that may to-morrow fall 
To feed the insatiate Prodigal ! 
Lawns, houses, chattels, groves, and fields, 
All that the fertile valley shields ; 
Wages of folly — baits of crime, 
Of life's uneasy game the stake, 
Playthings that keep the eyes awake 
Of drowsy, dotard Time ; — 
care ! guilt ! — vales and plains, 
Here, 'mid his own unvexed domains, 
A Genius dwells, that can subdue 
At once all memory of You, — 
Most potent when mists veil the sky, 
Mists that distort and magnify ; 
While the coarse rushes, to the sweeping breeze. 
Sigh forth their ancient melodies ! 
in. 
List to those shriller notes ! — that march 
Perchance was on the blast, 
When, through this Height's inverted arch, 
Rome's earliest legion passed ! 
— They saw, adventurously impelled, 
And older eyes than theirs beheld, 
This block — and yon, whose church-like frame 
Gives to this savage Pass its name. 
Aspiring Road ! that lov'st to hide 
Thy daring in a vapoury bourn, 
Not seldom may the hour return 
When thou shalt be my guide : 
And I (as all men may find cause, 
When life is at a weary pause, 
And they have panted up the hill 
Of duty with reluctant will) 
Be thankful, even though tired and faint, 
For the rich bounties of constraint ; 
Whence oft invigorating transports flow 
That choice lacked courage to bestow ! 



TO ENTERPRISE. 

 

My Soul was grateful for delight 
That wore a threatening brow ; 
A veil is lifted — can she slight 
The scene that opens now ? 
Though habitation none appear, 
The greenness tells, man must be there ; 
The shelter — that the perspective 
Is of the clime in which we live ; 
Where Toil pursues his daily round ; 
Where Pity sheds sweet tears — and Love, 
In woodbine bower or birchen grove, 
Inflicts his tender wound. 
— Who comes not hither ne'er shall know 
How beautiful the world below ; 
Nor can he guess how lightly leaps 
The brook adown the rocky steeps. 
Farewell, thou desolate Domain ! 
Hope, pointing to the cultured plain, 
Carols like a shepherd-boy ; 
And who is she \ — Can that be Joy ! 
Who, with a sunbeam for her guide, 
Smoothly skims the meadows wide ; 
While Faith, from yonder opening cloud, 
To hill and vale proclaims aloud, 
" Whate'er the weak may dread, the wicked dare, 
Thy lot, Man, is good, thy portion fair !" 
. 

TO ENTERPRISE. 

Keep for the Young the impassioned smile 
Shed from thy countenance, as I see thee stand 
High on that chalky cliff of Briton's Isle, 
A slender volume grasping hi thy hand — 
(Perchance the pages that relate 
The various turns of Crusoe's fate) — 
Ah, spare the exulting smile, 
! And drop thy pointing finger bright 
As the first flash of beacon light ; 
i Eut neither veil thy head in shadows dim, 
 Nor turn thy face away 
From One who, in the evening of his day, 
To thee would offer no presumptuous hymn ! 
i. 
Bold Spirit ! who art free to rove 
Among the starry courts of Jove, 
And oft in splendour dost appear 
Embodied to poetic eyes, 
While traversing this nether sphere, 
Where Mortals call thee Enterprise. 

Daughter of Hope ! her favourite Child, 
Whom she to young Ambition bore, 
When hunter's arrow first defiled 
The grove, and stained the turf with gore ; 
Thee winged Fancy took, and nursed 
On broad Euphrates' palmy shore, 
And where the mightier Waters burst 
From caves of Indian mountains hoar ! 
She wrapped thee in a panther's skin ; 
And Thou, thy favourite food to win, 
The flame-eyed eagle oft wouldst scare 
From her rock-fortress in mid air, 
With infant shout ; and often sweep, 
Paired with the ostrich, o'er the plain ; 
Or, tired with sport, wouldst sink asleep 
Upon the couchant lion's mane ! 
With rolling years thy strength increased ; 
And, far beyond thy native East, 
To thee, by varying titles known 
As variously thy power was shown, 
Did incense-bearing altars rise, 
Which caught the blaze of sacrifice, 
From suppliants panting for the skies ! 

What though this ancient Earth be trod 
No more by step of Demi-god 
Mounting from glorious deed to deed 
As thou from clime to clime didst lead ; 
Yet still, the bosom beating high, 
And the hushed farewell of an eye 
Where no procrastinating gaze 
A last infirmity betrays, 
Prove that thy heaven-descended sway 
Shall ne'er submit to cold decay. 
By thy divinity impelled, 
The Stripling seeks the tented field ; 
The aspiring Virgin kneels ; and, pale 
With awe, receives the hallowed veil, 
A soft and tender Heroine 
Vowed to severer discipline ; 
Inflamed by thee, the blooming Boy 
Makes of the whistling shrouds a toy, 
And of the ocean's dismal breast 
A play-ground, — or a couch of rest ; 
'Mid the blank world of snow and ice, 
Thou to his dangers dost enchain 
The Chamois-chaser awed in vain 
By chasm or dizzy precipice ; 
And hast Thou not with triumph seen 
How soaring Mortals glide between 
Or through the clouds, and brave the light 
With bolder than Icarian flight ? 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

How they, in bells of crystal, dive — 
Where winds and waters cease to strive — 
For no unholy visitings, 
Among the monsters of the Deep ; 
And all the sad and precious things 
Which there in ghastly silence sleep  
Or, adverse tides and currents headed, 
And breathless calms no longer dreaded, 
In never-slackening voyage go 
Straight as an arrow from the bow ; 
And, slighting sails and scorning oars, 
Keep faith with Time on distant shores ? 
— Within our fearless reach are placed 
The secrets of the burning Waste ; 
Egyptian tombs unlock their dead, 
Nile trembles at his fountain head ; 
Thou speak'st — and lo ! the polar Seas 
Unbosom their last mysteries. 
— But oh ! what transports, what sublime reward, 
Won from the world of mind, dost thou prepare 
For philosophic Sage ; or high-souled Bard 
Who, for thy service trained in lonely woods, 
Hath fed on pageants floating through the air, 
Or calentured in depth of limpid floods ; 
Nor grieves — tho' doomed thro' silent night to bear 
The domination of his glorious themes, 
Or struggle in the net-work of thy dreams ! 

If there be movements in the Patriot's soul, 
From source still deeper, and of higher worth, 
'Tis thine the quickening impulse to control, 
And in due season send the mandate forth ; 
Thy call a prostrate Nation can restore, 
When but a single Mind resolves to crouch no 
more. 

Dread Minister of wrath ! 
Who to their destined punishment dost urge 
The Pharaohs of the earth, the men of hardened 
heart ! 
Not unassisted by the flattering stars, 
Thou strew'st temptation o'er the path 
When they in pomp depart 
With trampling horses and refulgent cars — 
Soon to be swallowed by the briny surge ; 
Or cast, for lingering death, on unknown strands ; 
Or caught amid a whhd of desert sands — 
An Army now, and now a living hill 
That a brief while heaves with convulsive throes — 
Then all is still ; 
Or, to forget their madness and their woes, 
Wrapt in a winding-sheet of spotless snows ! 

Back flows the willing current of my Song : 
If to provoke such doom the Impious dare, 
Why should it daunt a blameless prayer ? 
— Bold Goddess ! range our Youth among ; 
Nor let thy genuine impulse fail to beat 
In hearts no longer young ; 
Still may a veteran Few have pride 
In thoughts whose sternness makes them sweet ; 
In fixed resolves by Reason justified ; 
That to their object cleave like sleet 
Whitening a pine tree's northern side, 
When fields are naked far and wide, 
And withered leaves, from earth's cold breast 
Up-caught in whirlwinds, nowhere can find rest. 

But, if such homage thou disdain 
As doth with mellowing years agree, 
One rarely absent from thy train 
More humble favours may obtain 
For thy contented Votary. 
She, who incites the frolic lambs 
In presence of their heedless dams, 
And to the solitary fawn 
Vouchsafes her lessons, bounteous Nymph 
That wakes the breeze, the sparkling lymph 
Doth hurry to the lawn ; 
She, who inspires that strain of joyance holy 
Which the sweet Bird, misnamed the melancholy 
Pours forth in shady groves, shall plead for rae ; 
And vernal mornings opening bright 
With views of undefined delight, 
And cheerful songs, and suns that shine 
On busy days, with thankful nights, be mine. 

But thou, Goddess ! in thy favourite Isle 
(Freedom's impregnable redoubt, 
The wide earth's store-house fenced about 
With breakers roaring to the gales 
That stretch a thousand thousand sails) 
Quicken the slothful, and exalt the vile ! — 
Thy impulse is the life of Fame ; 
Glad Hope would almost cease to be 
If torn from thy society ; 
And Love, when worthiest of his name, 
Is proud to walk the earth with Thee  

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

 

TO- 

ON HEB FIEST ASCENT TO THS SUMMIT OF HELVELLTN. 
Inmate of a mountain-dwelling, 
Thou hast clomb aloft, and gazed 
From the watch-towers of Heivellyn ; 
Awed, delighted, and amazed ! 
Potent was the spell that hound thee 
Not unwilling to obey ; 
For blue Ether's arms, flung round thee, 
Stilled the pantings of dismay. 
Lo ! the dwindled woods and meadows ; 
What a vast abyss is there ! 
Lo ! the clouds, the solemn shadows, 
And the glistenings — heavenly fair ! 
And a record of commotion 
Which a thousand ridges yield ; 
Ridge, and gulf, and distant ocean 
Gleaming like a silver shield ! 
Maiden ! now take flight ; — inherit 
Alps or Andes — they are thine ! 
With the morning's roseate Spirit, 
Sweep their length of snowy line ; 
Or survey their bright dominions 
In the gorgeous colours drest 
Flung from off the purple pinions, 
Evening spreads throughout the west ! 
Thine are all the coral fountains 
Warbling in each sparry vault 
Of the untrodden lunar mountains ; 
Listen to their songs ! — or halt, 
To Niphates' top invited, 
W hither spiteful Satan steered ; 
Or descend where the ark alighted, 
When the green earth re-appeared ; 
For the power of hills is on thee, 
As was witnessed through thine eye 
Then, when old Heivellyn won thee 
To confess their majesty ! 

TO A YOUNG LADY, 
WHO HAD BEEN REPROACHED FOK TAKING LONG WALKS 
IN THE CODNTRT. 
Dear Child of Nature, let them rail ! 
■ — There is a nest in a green dale, 
A harbour and a hold ; 
Where thou, a Wife and Friend, shalt see 
Thy own heart-stirring days, and be 
A light to young and old. 
There, healthy as a shepherd boy, 
And treading among flowers of joy 
Which at no season fade, 
Thou, while thy babes around thee cling, 
Shalt show us how divine a tiling 
A Woman may be made. 
Thy thoughts and feelings shall not die, 
Nor leave thee, when grey hairs are nigh 
A melancholy slave ; 
But an old age serene and bright, 
And lovely as a Lapland night, 
Shall lead thee to thy grave. 

WATER-FOWL. 

' Let me be allowed the aid of verse to describe the evolu- 
' tions which these visitants sometimes perform, on a fine 
' day towards the close of winter.' — Extract from, the 
Author's Book on the Lakes. 
Mark how the feathered tenants of the flood, 
With grace of motion that might scarcely seem 
Inferior to angelical, prolong 
Their curious pastime ! shaping in mid air 
(And sometimes with ambitious wing that soars 
High as the level of the mountain-tops) 
A circuit ampler than the lake beneath — 
Their own domain ; but ever, while intent 
On tracing and retracing that large round, 
Their jubilant activity evolves 
Hundreds of curves and circlets, to and fro, 
Upward and downward, progress intricate 
Yet unperplexed, as if one spirit swayed 
Their indefatigable flight. 'Tis done — 
Ten times, or more, I fancied it had ceased ; 
But lo ! the vanished company again 
Ascending ; they approach — I hear their wings, 
Faint, faint at first ; and then an eager sound, 
Past in a moment— and as faint again ! 
They tempt the sun to sport amid their plumes ; 

 


POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

They tempt the water, or the gleaming ice, 
To show them a fair image ; 'tis themselves, 
Their own fair forms, upon the glimmering plain, 
Painted more soft and fair as they descend 
Almost to touch ; — then up again aloft, 
Up with a sally and a flash of speed, 
As if they scorned both resting-place and rest ! 
. 

VIEW FROM THE TOP OF BLACK COMB. 
This Height a ministering Angel might select : 
For from the summit of Black Comb (dread name 
Derived from clouds and storms ! ) the amplest range 
Of unobstructed prospect may be seen 
That British ground commands : — low dusky tracts, 
Where Trent is nursed, far southward ! Cambrian 
hills 
To the south-west, a multitudinous show ; 
And, in a line of eye-sight linked with these, 
The hoary peaks of Scotland that give birth 
To Tiviot's stream, to Annan, Tweed, and Clyde : — 
Crowding the quarter whence the sun comes forth 
Gigantic mountains rough with crags ; beneath, 
Right at the imperial station's western base 
Main ocean, breaking audibly, and stretched 
Far into silent regions blue and pale ; — 
And visibly engirding Mona's Isle 
That, as we left the plain, before our sight 
Stood like a lofty mount, uplifting slowly 
(Above the convex of the watery globe) 
Into clear view the cultured fields that streak 
Her habitable shores, but now appears 
A dwindled object, and submits to he 
At the spectator's feet. — Yon azure ridge, 
Is it a perishable cloud ? Or there 
Do we behold the line of Erin's coast? 
Land sometimes by the roving shepherd-swain 
(Like the bright confines of another world) 
Not doubtfully perceived. — Look homeward now ! 
In depth, in height, in circuit, how serene 
The spectacle, how pure !— Of Nature's works, 
In earth, and air, and earth-embracing sea, 
A revelation infinite it seems ; 
Display august of man's inheritance, 
Of Britain's calm felicity and power ! 
. 
Black Comb stands at the southern extremity of 
Cumberland : its base covers a much greater extent of 
ground than any other mountain in those parts ; and, 
from its situation, the summit commands a more extensive 
view than any other point in Britain. 

THE HAUNTED TREE. 

Those silver clouds collected round the sun 
His mid-day warmth abate not, seeming less 
To overshade than multiply his beams 
By soft reflection — grateful to the sky, 
To rocks, fields, woods. Nor doth our human 
sense 
Ask, for its pleasure, screen or canopy 
More ample than the time-dismantled Oak 
Spreads o'er this tuft of heath, which now, attired 
In the whole fulness of its bloom, affords 
Couch beautiful as e 'er for earthly use 
Was fashioned ; whether by the hand of Art, 
That eastern Sultan, amid flowers enwrought 
On silken tissue, might diffuse his limbs 
In languor ; or, by Nature, for repose 
Of panting Wood-nymph, wearied with the chase. 
Lady ! fairer in thy Poet's sight 
Than fairest spiritual creature of the groves, 
Approach ; — and, thus invited, crown with rest 
The noon-tide hour : though truly some there are 
Whose footsteps superstitiously avoid 
This venerable Tree ; for, when the wind 
Blows keenly, it sends forth a creaking sound 
(Above the general roar of woods and crags) 
Distinctly heard from far — a doleful note ! 
As if (so Grecian shepherds would have deemed) 
The Hamadryad, pent within, bewailed 
Some bitter wrong. Nor is it unbelieved, 
By ruder fancy, that a troubled ghost 
Haunts the old trunk ; lamenting deeds of which 
The flowery ground is conscious. But no wind 
Sweeps now along this elevated ridge ; 
Not even a zephyr stirs ; — the obnoxious Tree 
Is mute ; and, in his silence, would look down, 
O lovely Wanderer of the trackless hills, 
On thy reclining form with more delight 
Than his coevals in the sheltered vale 
Seem to participate, the while they view 
Their own far-stretching arms and leafy heads 
Vividly pictured in some glassy pool, 
That, for a brief space, checks the hurrying 
stream ! 

THE TRIAD. 

 

THE TEIAD. 
Show me the noblest Youth of present time, 
Whose trembling fancy would to love give birth ; 
Some God or Hero, from the Olympian clime 
Returned, to seek a Consort upon earth ; 
Or, in no doubtful prospect, let me see 
The brightest star of ages yet to be, 
And I will mate and match him blissfully. 
I will not fetch a Naiad from a flood 
Pure as herself — (song lacks not mightier power) 
Nor leaf-crowned Dryad from a pathless wood, 
Nor Sea-nymph glistening from her coral bower ; 
Mere Mortals bodied forth in vision still, 
Shall with Mount Ida's triple lustre fill 
The chaster coverts of a British hill. 
" Appear ! — obey my lyre's command ! 
Come, like the Graces, hand in hand ! 
For ye, though not by birth allied, 
\ Are Sisters in the bond of love ; 
Nor shall the tongue of envious pride 
! Presume those interweavings to reprove 
! In you, which that fair progeny of Jove, 
Learned from the tuneful spheres that glide 
'. In endless union, earth and sea above." 
 — I sing in vain ; — the pines have hushed their 
waving: 
' A peerless Youth expectant at my side, 
! Breathless as they, with unabated craving 
Looks to the earth, and to the vacant air ; 
; And, with a wandering eye that seems to chide, 
Asks of the clouds what occupants they hide : — 
But why solicit more than sight could bear, 
; By casting on a moment all we dare ? 
Invoke we those bright Beings one by one ; 
I And what was boldly promised, truly shall be done. 
" Fear not a constraining measure ! 
—Yielding to this gentle spell, 
Lucida ! from domes of pleasure. 
Or from cottage-sprinkled dell, 
I Come to regions solitary, 
 Where the eagle builds her aery, 
; Above the hermit's long-forsaken cell ! " 
f —She comes ! — behold 
: That Figure, like a ship with snow-white sail ! 
Nearer she draws ; a breeze uplifts her veil ; 
Upon her coming wait 
As pure a sunshine and as soft a gale 

As e'er, on herbage covering earthly mold, 
Tempted the bird of Juno to unfold 
His richest splendour — when his veering gait 
And every motion of his starry train 
Seem governed by a strain 
Of music, audible to him alone. 
" Lady, worthy of earth's proudest throne ! 
Nor less, by excellence of nature, fit 
Beside an unambitious hearth to sit 
Domestic queen, where grandeur is unknown ; 
What living man could fear 
The worst of Fortune's malice, wert Thou near, 
Humbling that lily-stem, thy sceptre meek, 
That its fair flowers may from his cheek 
Brush the too happy tear? 
Queen, and handmaid lowly ! 
Whose skill can speed the day with lively cares, 
And banish melancholy 
By all that mind invents or hand prepares ; 
Thou, against whose lip, without its smile 
And in its silence even, no heart is proof ; 
Whose goodness, sinking deep, would reconcile 
The softest Nursling of a gorgeous palace 
To the bare life beneath the hawthorn-roof 
Of Sherwood's Archer, or in caves of Wallace — - 
Who that hath seen thy beauty could content 
His soul with but a glimpse of heavenly day ? 
Who that hath loved thee, but would lay 
His strong hand on the wind, if it were bent 
To take thee in thy majesty away I 
— Pass onward (even the glancing deer 
Till we depart intrude not here ;) 
That mossy slope, o'er which the woodbine throws 
A canopy, is smoothed for thy repose ! " 
Glad moment is it when the throng 
Of warblers in full concert strong 
Strive, and not vainly strive, to rout 
The lagging shower, and force coy Phoebus out, 
Met by the rainbow's form divine, 
Issuing from her cloudy shrine ; — 
So may the thrillings of the lyre 
Prevail to further our desire, 
While to these shades a sister Nymph I call. 
" Come, if the notes thine ear may pierce, 
Come, youngest of the lovely Three, 
Submissive to the might of verse 
And the dear voice of harmony, 
By none more deeply felt than Thee ! " 
— I sang ; and lo ! from pastimes virginal 
She hastens to the tents 
Of nature, and the lonely elements. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Air sparkles round her with a dazzling sheen ; 
But mark her glowing cheek, her vesture green ! 
And, as if wishful to disarm 
Or to repay the potent Charm, 
She hears the stringed lute of old romance, 
That cheered the trellised arbour's privacy, 
And soothed war-wearied knights in raftered hall. 
How vivid, yet how delicate, her glee ! 
So tripped the Muse, inventress of the dance ; 
So, truant in waste woods, the blithe Euphrosyne ! 
But the ringlets of that head 
Why are they ungarlanded ? 
Why bedeck her temples less 
Than the simplest shepherdess ? 
Is it not a brow inviting 
Choicest flowers that ever breathed, 
Which the myrtle would delight in 
With Idalian rose enwreathed \ 
But her humility is well content 
With one wild floweret (call it not forlorn) 
Flower of the winds, beneath her bosom worn — 
Yet more for love than ornament. 
Open, ye thickets ! let her fly, 
Swift as a Thracian Nymph o'er field and height ! 
For She, to all but those who love her, shy, 
Would gladly vanish from a Stranger's sight ; 
Though where she is beloved and loves, 
Light as the wheeling butterfly she moves ; 
Her happy spirit as a bird is free, 
That rifles blossoms on a tree, 
Turning them inside out with arch audacity. 
Alas ! how little can a moment show 
Of an eye where feeling plays 
In ten thousand dewy rays ; 
A face o'er which a thousand shadows go ! 
— She stops — is fastened to that rivulet's side ; 
And there (while, with sedater mien, 
O'er timid waters that have scarcely left 
Their birth-place in the rocky cleft 
She bends) at leisure may be seen 
Features to old ideal grace allied, 
Amid their smiles and dimples dignified — 
Fit countenance for the soul of primal truth ; 
The bland composure of eternal youth ! 
What more changeful than the sea ? 
But over his great tides 
Fidelity presides ; 
And this light-hearted Maiden constant is as he. 
High is her aim as heaven above, 
And wide as ether her good-will ; 
And, like the lowly reed, her love 
Can drink its nurture from the scantiest rill : 

Insight as keen as frosty star 
Is to her charity no bar, 
Nor interrupts her frolic graces 
When she is, far from these wild places, 
Encircled by familiar faces. 
the charm that manners draw, 
Nature, from thy genuine law ! 
If from what her hand would do, 
Her voice would utter, aught ensue 
Untoward or unfit ; 
She, in benign affections pure, 
In self-forgetfulness secure, 
Sheds round the transient harm or vague mis- 
chance 
A fight unknown to tutored elegance : 
Her's is not a cheek shame-stricken, 
But her blushes are joy-flushes ; 
And the fault (if fault it be) 
Only ministers to quicken 
Laughter-loving gaiety, 
And kindle sportive wit — 
Leaving this Daughter of the mountains free 
As if she knew that Oberon king of Faery 
Had crossed her purpose with some quaint vagary, 
And heard his viewless bands 
Over their mirthful triumph clapping hands. 



" Last of the Three, though eldest born, 
Reveal thyself, like pensive Morn 
Touched by the skylark's earliest note, 
Ere humbler gladness be afloat. 
But whether in the semblance drest 
Of Dawn — or Eve, fair vision of the west, 
Come with each anxious hope subdued 
By woman's gentle fortitude, 
Each grief, through meekness, settling into rest. 
— Or I would hail thee when some high-wrought 
page 
Of a closed volume lingering in thy hand 
Has raised thy spirit to a peaceful stand 
Among the glories of a happier age." 
Her brow hath opened on me — see it there, 
Brightening the umbrage of her hair ; 
So gleams the crescent moon, that loves 
To be descried through shady groves. 
Tenderest bloom is on her cheek ; 
Wish not for a richer streak ; 
Nor dread the depth of meditative eye j 
But let thy love, upon that azure field 
Of thoughtfulness and beauty, yield 
Its homage offered up in purity. 
What would'st thou more ? In sunny glade, 
Or under leaves of thickest shade, 

THE WISHING-GATE. 

 

Was such a stillness e'er diffused 
; Since earth grew calm while angels mused ? 
' Softly she treads, as if her foot were loth 
To crush the mountain dew-drops — soon to melt 
I On the flower's breast ; as if she felt 
That flowers themselves, whate'er their hue, 
With all their fragrance, all their glistening, 
Call to the heart for inward listening — 
And though for bridal wreaths and tokens true 
Welcomed wisely ; though a growth 
'Which the careless shepherd sleeps on, 
As fitly spring from turf the mourner weeps on — 
And without wrong are cropped the marble tomb 
to strew. 
The Charm is over ; the mute Phantoms gone, 
Nor will return— but droop not, favoured Youth ; 
The apparition that before thee shone 
.Obeyed a summons covetous of truth. 
From these wild rocks thy footsteps I will guide 
To bowers in which thy fortune may be tried, 
And one of the bright Three become thy happy 
Bride. 
. 



XLI. 
THE WISHING-GATE, 

In the vale of Grasmere, by the side of the old high-way lead- 
! ing to Ambleside, is a gate, which, time out of mind, 
has been called the Wishing-gate, from a belief that 
. wishes formed or indulged there have a favourable 
, issue. 
Hope rules a land for ever green : 
All powers that serve the bright-eyed Queen 
Are confident and gay ; 
Clouds at her bidding disappear ; 
Points she to aught  — the bliss draws near, 
And Fancy smooths the way. 
Not such the land of Wishes— there 
Dwell fruitless day-dreams, lawless prayer, 
And thoughts with things at strife ; 
Yet how forlorn, should ye depart 
Ye superstitions of the heart, 
How poor, were human life ! 
When magic lore abjured its might, 
Ye did not forfeit one dear right, 
One tender claim abate ; 
Witness this symbol of your sway, 
Surviving near the public way, 
The rustic Wishing-gate ! 

Inquire not if the faery race 
Shed kindly influence on the place, 
Ere northward they retired ; 
If here a warrior left a spell, 
Panting for glory as he fell ; 
Or here a saint expired. 
Enough that all around is fair, 
Composed with Nature's finest care, 
And in her fondest love — 
Peace to embosom and content — 
To overawe the turbulent, 
The selfish to reprove. 
Yea ! even the Stranger from afar, 
Reclining on this moss-grown bar, 
Unknowing, and unknown, 
The infection of the ground partakes, 
Longing for his Belov'd — who makes 
All happiness her own. 
Then why should conscious Spirits fear 
The mystic stirrings that are here, 
The ancient faith disclaim ? 
The local Genius ne'er befriends 
Desires whose course in folly ends, 
Whose just reward is shame. 
Smile if thou wilt, but not hi scorn, 
If some, by ceaseless pains outworn, 
Here crave an easier lot ; 
If some have thirsted to renew 
A broken vow, or bind a true, 
With firmer, holier knot. 
And not in vain, when thoughts are cast 
Upon the irrevocable past, 
Some Penitent sincere 
May for a worthier future sigh, 
While trickles from his downcast eye 
No unavailing tear. 
The Worldling, pining to be freed 
From turmoil, who would turn or speed 
The current of his fate, 
Might stop before this favoured scene, 
At Nature's call, nor blush to lean 
Upon the Wishing-gate. 
The Sage, who feels how blind, how weak 
Is man, though loth such help to seek, 
Yet, passing, here might pause, 
And thirst for insight to allay 
Misgiving, while the crimson day 
In quietness withdraws ; 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Or when the church-clock's knell profound 
To Time's first step across the bound 
Of midnight makes reply ; 
Time pressing on with starry crest, 
To filial sleep upon the breast 
Of dread eternity. 

XLII. 
THE WISHING-GATE DESTROYED. 
'Tis gone — with old belief and dream 
That round it clung, and tempting scheme 
Released from fear and doubt ; 
And the bright landscape too must lie, 
By this blank wall, from every eye, 
Relentlessly shut out. 
Bear witness ye who seldom passed 
That opening — but a look ye cast 
Upon the lake below, 
What spirit-stirring power it gained 
From faith which here was entertained, 
Though reason might say no. 
Blest is that ground, where, o'er the springs 
Of history, Glory claps her wings, 
Fame sheds the exulting tear ; 
Yet earth is wide, and many a nook 
Unheard of is, like this, a book 
For modest meanings dear. 
It was in sooth a happy thought 
That grafted, on so fair a spot, 
So confident a token 
Of coming good ; — the charm is fled ; 
Indulgent centuries spun a thread, 
Which one harsh day has broken. 
Alas ! for him who gave the word : 
Could he no sympathy afford, 
Derived from earth or heaven, 
To hearts so oft by hope betrayed ; 
Their very wishes wanted aid 
Which here was freely given ? 
Where, for the love-lorn maiden's wound, 
Will now so readily be found 
A balm of expectation  
Anxious for far-off children, where 
Shall mothers breathe a like sweet air 
Of home-felt consolation  


And not unfelt will prove the loss 
'Mid trivial care and petty cross 
And each day's shallow grief; 
Though the most easily beguiled 
Were oft among the first that smiled 
At their own fond belief. 
If still the reckless change we mourn, 
A reconciling thought may turn 
To harm that might lurk here, 
Ere judgment prompted from within 
Fit aims, with courage to begin, 
And strength to persevere. 
Not Fortune's slave is Man : our state 
Enjoins, while firm resolves await 
On wishes just and wise, 
That strenuous action follow both, 
And life be one perpetual growth 
Of heaven- ward enterprise. 
So taught, so trained, we boldly face 
All accidents of time and place ; 
Whatever props may fail, 
Trust in that sovereign law can spread 
New glory o'er the mountain's head, 
Fresh beauty through the vale. 
That truth informing mind and heart, 
The simplest cottager may part, 
Ungrieved, with charm and spell ; 
And yet, lost Wishing-gate, to thee 
The voice of grateful memory 
Shall bid a kind farewell ! 
See Note at the end of the Volume. 

XLII. 
THE PRIMROSE OF THE ROCK. 
A Rock there is whose homely front 
The passing traveller slights ; 
Yet there the glow-worms hang their lamps, 
Like stars, at various heights ; 
And one coy Primrose to that Rock 
The vernal breeze invites. 
What hideous warfare hath been waged, 
What kingdoms overthrown, 
Since first I spied that Primrose-tuft 
And marked it for my own ; 
A lasting link in Nature's chain 
From highest heaven let down ! 

PRESENTIMENTS. 

 

The flowers, still faithful to the stems, 
Their fellowship renew ; 
The stems are faithful to the root, 
That worketh out of view ; 
And to the rock the root adheres 
In every fihre true. 
Close clings to earth the living rock, 
Though threatening still to fall ; 
The earth is constant to her sphere ; 
And God upholds them all : 
So blooms this lonely Plant, nor dreads 
Her annual funeral. 

Here closed the meditative strain ; 
But air breathed soft that day, 
The hoary mountain-heights were cheered, 
The sunny vale looked gay ; 
And to the Primrose of the Rock 
I gave this after-lay. 
I sang — Let myriads of bright flowers, 
Like Thee, in field and grove 
Revive unenvied ; — mightier far, 
Than tremblings that reprove 
Our vernal tendencies to hope, 
Is God's redeeming love ; 
That love which changed — for wan disease, 
For sorrow that had bent 
O'er hopeless dust, for withered age — 
Their moral element, 
And turned the thistles of a curse 
To types beneficent. 
Sin-blighted though we are, we too, 
The reasoning Sons of Men, 
From one oblivious winter called 
Shall rise, and breathe again ; 
And in eternal summer lose 
Our threescore years and ten. 
To humbleness of heart descends 
This prescience from on high, 
The faith that elevates the just, 
Before and when they die ; 
And makes each soul a separate heaven, 
A court for Deity. 

xuv. 
PRESENTIMENTS. 
Presentiments ! they judge not right 
Who deem that ye from open light 
Retire in fear of shame ; 
All heaven-born Instincts shun the touch 
Of vulgar sense, — and, being such, 
Such privilege ye claim. 
The tear whose source I could not guess, 
The deep sigh that seemed fatherless, 
Were mine in early days ; 
And now, unforced by time to part 
With fancy, I obey my heart, 
And venture on your praise. 
What though some busy foes to good, 
Too potent over nerve and blood, 
Lurk near you — and combine 
To taint the health which ye infuse ; 
This hides not from the moral Muse 
Your origin divine. 
How oft from you, derided Powers ! 
Comes Faith that in auspicious hours 
Builds castles, not of air : 
Bodings unsanctioned by the will 
Flow from your visionary skill, 
And teach us to beware. 
The bosom-weight, your stubborn gift, 
That no philosophy can lift, 
Shall vanish, if ye please, 
Like morning mist : and, where it lay, 
The spirits at your bidding play 
In gaiety and ease. 
Star-guided contemplations move 
Through space, though calm, not raised above 
Prognostics that ye rule; 
The naked Indian of the wild, 
And haply, too, the cradled Child, 
Are pupils of your school. 
But who can fathom your intents, 
Number their signs or instruments ? 
A rainbow, a sunbeam, 
A subtle smell that Spring unbinds, 
Dead pause abrupt of midnight winds, 
An echo, or a dream. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

The laughter of the Christmas hearth 
With sighs of self-exhausted mirth 
Ye feelingly reprove ; 
And daily, in the conscious breast, 
Your visitations are a test 
And exercise of love. 
When some great change gives boundless scope 
To an exulting Nation's hope, 
Oft, startled and made wise 
By your low-breathed interpretings, 
The simply-meek foretaste the springs 
Of bitter contraries. 
Ye daunt the proud array of war, 
Pervade the lonely ocean far 
As sail hath been unfurled; 
For dancers in the festive hall 
What ghastly partners hath your call 
Fetched from the shadowy world. 
'Tis said, that warnings ye dispense, 
Emboldened by a keener sense ; 
That men have lived for whom, 
With dread precision, ye made clear 
The hour that in a distant year 
Should knell them to the tomb. 
Unwelcome insight ! Yet there are 
Blest times when mystery is laid bare, 
Truth shows a glorious face, 
While on that isthmus which commands 
The councils of both worlds, she stands, 
Sage Spirits ! by your grace. 
God, who instructs the brutes to scent 
All changes of the element, 
Whose wisdom fixed the scale 
Of natures, for our wants provides 
By higher, sometimes'humbler, guides, 
When lights of reason fail. 

VERNAL ODE. 

Rerum Niitura tota est nusquam magis quam in minimis. 
Pun. Nat. Hist. 
I, 
Beneath the concave of an April sky, 
When all the fields with freshest green were dight, 
Appeared, in presence of the spiritual eye 
That aids or supersedes our grosser sight, 

The form and rich habiliments of One 
Whose countenance bore resemblance to the sun, 
When it reveals, in evening majesty, 
Features half lost amid their own pure light. 
Poised like a weary cloud, in middle air 
He hung, — then floated with angelic ease 
(Softening that bright effulgence by degrees) 
Till he had reached a summit sharp and bare, 
Where oft the venturous heifer drinks the noon- 
tide breeze. 
Upon the apex of that lofty cone 
Alighted, there the Stranger stood alone ; 
Fair as a gorgeous Fabric of the east 
Suddenly raised by some enchanter's power, 
Where nothing was ; and firm as some old Tower 
Of Britain's realm, whose leafy crest 
Waves high, embellished by a gleaming shower 

ver! i 
ies: li 

Beneath the shadow of his purple wings 
Rested a golden harp ;— he touched the strings 
And, after prelude of unearthly sound 
Poured through the echoing hills around, 
He sang — 
" No wintry desolations, 
Scorching blight or noxious dew, 
Affect my native habitations ; 
Buried in glory, far beyond the scope 
Of man's mquiring gaze, but to his hope 
Imaged, though faintly, in the hue 
Profound of night's ethereal blue ; 
And in the aspect of each radiant orb ; — 
Some fixed, some wandering with no timid curb ; 
But wandering star and fixed, to mortal eye, 
Blended in absolute serenity, 
And free from semblance of decline ; — 
Fresh as if Evening brought their natal hour, 
Her darkness splendour gave, her silence powor, 
To testify of Love and Grace divine. 

What if those bright fires 
Shine subject to decay, 
Sons haply of extinguished sires, 
Themselves to lose their light, or pass away 
Like clouds before the wind, 
Be thanks poured out to Him whose hand bestows 
Nightly, on human land 
That vision of endurance and reposs. 
— And though to every draught of vital breaffl 
Renewed throughout the bounds of earth or oceaiij 
The melancholy gates of Death 
Respond with sympathetic motion ; 

DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS. 

 

Though all that feeds on nether air, 
Howe'er magnificent or fair, 
Grows hut to perish, and entrust 
Its ruins to their kindred dust ; 
Yet, by the Almighty's ever-during care, 
Her procreant vigils Nature keeps 
Amid the unfathomable deeps ; 
And saves the peopled fields of earth 
From dread of emptiness or dearth. 
Thus, in their stations, lifting tow'rd the sky 
The foliaged head in cloud-like majesty, 
The shadow-casting race of trees survive : 
Thus, in the train of Spring, arrive 
Sweet flowers ; — what living eye hath viewed 
Their myriads  — endlessly renewed, 
Wherever strikes the sun's glad ray ; 
Where'er the subtle waters stray ; 
Wherever sportive breezes bend 
Their course, or genial showers descend ! 
Mortals, rejoice ! the very Angels quit 
Their mansions unsusceptible of change, 
Amid your pleasant bowers to sit, 
[And through your sweet vicissitudes to range !" 

mO, nursed at happy distance from the cares 
||f a too-anxious world, mild pastoral Muse ! 
That, to the sparkling crown Urania wears, 
I And to her sister Clio's laurel wreath, 
Prefer'st a garland culled from purple heath, 
Or blooming thicket moist with morning dews ; 
Was such bright Spectacle vouchsafed to me \ 
[And was it granted to the simple ear 
Of thy contented Votary 
Such melody to hear ! 
Him rather suits it, side by side with thee, 
Wrapped in a fit of pleasing indolence, 
While thy tired lute hangs on the hawthorn-tree, 
To He and listen — till o'er-drowsed sense 
Sinks, hardly conscious of the influence — 
To the soft murmur of the vagrant Bee. 
—A slender sound ! yet hoary Time 
; Doth to the Soul exalt it with the chime 
Df all his years ; — a company 
Of ages coming, ages gone ; 
Nations from before them sweeping, 
Regions in destruction steeping,) 
But every awful note in unison 
pith that faint utterance, which tells 
Of treasure sucked from buds and bells, 
For the pure keeping of those waxen cells ; 
(Where She — a statist prudent to confer 
ppon the common weal ; a warrior bold, 
Radiant all over with unburnished gold, 

And armed with living spear for mortal fight ; 
A cunning forager 
That spreads no waste ; a social builder ; one 
In whom all busy offices unite 
With all fine functions that afford delight — 
Safe through the winter storm in quiet dwells ! 
v. 
And is She brought within the power 
Of vision ? — o'er this tempting flower 
Hovering until the petals stay 
Her flight, and take its voice away ! — 
Observe each wing ! — a tiny van ! 
The structure of her laden thigh, 
How fragile ! yet of ancestry 
Mysteriously remote and high ; 
High as the imperial front of man ; 
The roseate bloom on woman's cheek ; 
The soaring eagle's curved beak ; 
The white plumes of the floating swan ; 
Old as the tiger's paw, the lion's mane 
Ere shaken by that mood of stern disdain 
At which the desert trembles. — Humming Bee ! 
Thy sting was needless then, perchance unknown, 
The seeds of malice were not sown ; 
All creatures met in peace, from fierceness five, 
And no pride blended with their dignity. 
— Tears had not broken from their source ; 
Nor Anguish strayed from her Tartarean den ; 
The golden years maintained a course 
Not undiversified though smooth and even ; 
We were not mocked with glimpse and shadow then, 
Bright Seraphs mixed familiarly with men ; 
And earth and stars composed a universal heaven ! 
. 

DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS. 
' Not to the earth confined, 
Ascend to heaven." 
Where will they stop, those breathing Powers, 
The Spirits of the new-born flowers \ 
They wander with the breeze, they wind 
Where'er the streams a passage find ; 
Up from their native ground they rise 
In mute aerial harmonies ; 
From humble violet — modest thyme — 
Exhaled, the essential odours climb, 
As if no space below the sky 
Their subtle flight could satisfy : 
Heaven will not tax our thoughts with pride 
If like ambition be their guide. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Roused by this kindliest of May-showers, 
The spirit-quickener of the flowers, 
That with moist virtue softly cleaves 
The buds, and freshens the young leaves, 
The birds pour forth their souls in notes 
Of rapture from a thousand throats — 
Here checked by too impetuous haste, 
While there the music runs to waste, 
With bounty more and more enlarged, 
Till the whole air is overcharged ; 
Give ear, Man ! to their appeal 
And thirst for no inferior zeal, 
Thou, who canst think, as well as feel. 
Mount from the earth ; aspire ! aspire ! 
So pleads the town's cathedral quire, 
In strains that from then." solemn height 
Sink, to attain a loftier flight ; 
While incense from the altar breathes 
Rich fragrance in embodied wreaths ; 
Or, flung from swinging censer, shrouds 
The taper-lights, and curls in clouds 
Around angelic Forms, the still 
Creation of the painter's skill, 
That on the service wait concealed 
One moment, and the next revealed 
- — Cast off your bonds, awake, arise, 
And for no transient ecstasies ! 
What else can mean the visual plea 
Of still or moving imagery — 
The iterated summons loud, 
Not wasted on the attendant crowd, 
Nor wholly lost upon the throng 
Hurrying the busy streets along ? 
Alas ! the sanctities combined 
By art to unsensualise the mind, 
Decay and languish ; or, as creeds 
And humours change, are spurned like weeds : 
The priests are from their altars thrust ; 
Temples are levelled with the dust ; 
And solemn rites and awful forms 
Founder amid fanatic storms. 
Yet evermore, through years renewed 
In undisturbed vicissitude 
Of seasons balancing then' flight 
On the swift wings of day and night, 
Kind Nature keeps a heavenly door 
Wide open for the scattered Poor. 
Where flower-breathed incense to the skies 
Is wafted in mute harmonies ; 
And ground fresh-cloven by the plough 
Is fragrant with a humbler vow ; 

Where birds and brooks from leafy dells 
Chime forth unwearied canticles, 
And vapours magnify and spread 
The glory of the sun's bright head — 
Still constant in her worship, still 
Conforming to the eternal Will, 
Whether men sow or reap the fields, 
Divine monition Nature yields, 
That not by bread alone we live, 
Or what a hand of flesh can give ; 
That every day should leave some part 
Free for a sabbath of the heart : 
So shall the seventh be truly blest, 
From morn to eve, with hallowed rest. 

THE CUCKOO-CLOCK. 
Wouldst thou be taught, when sleep has taken 
flight, 
By a sure voice that can most sweetly tell, 
How far-off yet a glimpse of morning light, 
And if to lure the truant back be well, 
Forbear to covet a Repeater's stroke, 
That, answering to thy touch, will sound the hour ; 
Better provide thee with a Cuckoo-clock 
For service hung behind thy chamber-door ; 
And in due time the soft spontaneous shock, 
The double note, as if with living power, 
Will to composure lead — or make thee blithe as! 
bird in bower. 
List, Cuckoo — Cuckoo ! — oft tho' tempests hew!, 
Or nipping frost remind thee trees are bare, 
How cattle pine, and droop the shivering fowl, 
Thy spirits will seem to feed on balmy air : 
I speak with knowledge, — by that Voice beguiled, 
Thou wilt salute old memories as they throng 
Into thy heart ; and fancies, running wild 
Through fresh green fields, and budding gi o> es 
among, 
Will make thee happy, happy as a child ; 
Of sunshine wilt thou think, and flowers, and songJ 
And breathe as in a world where nothing can g< 
wrong. 
And know — that, even for him who shuns the da) 
And nightly tosses on a bed of pain ; 
Whose joys, from all but memory swept awav, 
Must come unhoped for, if they come again ; 

TO THE CLOUDS. 

 

Know — that, for him whose waking thoughts, severe 
As his distress is sharp, would scorn my theme, 
The mimic notes, striking upon his ear 
In sleep, and intermingling with his dream, 
Could from sad regions send him to a dear 
Delightful land of verdure, shower and gleam, 
'To mock the wandering Voice beside some haunted 
stream. 
bounty without measure ! while the grace 
! f Heaven doth in such wise, from humblest 
springs, 
Pour pleasure forth, and solaces that trace 
A mazy course along familial things, 
Well may our hearts have faith that blessings come, 
streaming from founts above the starry sky, 
With angels when their own untroubled home 
They leave, and speed on nightly embassy 
To visit earthly chambers, — and for whom % 
ifea, both for souls who God's forbearance try, 
And those that seek his help, and for his mercy sigh. 

TO THE CLOUDS. 

Lrmy of Clouds ! ye winged Host in troops 
Ascending from behind the motionless brow 
W that tall rock, as from a hidden world, 
) whither with such eagerness of speed ? 
jVhat seek ye, or what shun ye ? of the gale 
''ompanions, fear ye to be left behind, 
,r racing o'er your blue ethereal field 
'ontend ye with each other? of the sea 
hildren, thus post ye over vale and height 
'o sink upon your mother's lap — and rest ? 
j'r were ye rightlier hailed, when first mine eyes 
ieheld in your impetuous march the likeness 
:'f a wide army pressing on to meet 
t overtake some unknown enemy ? — 
lut your smooth motions suit a peaceful aim ; 
..nd Fancy, not less aptly pleased, compares 
our squadrons to an endless flight of birds 
erial, upon due migration bound 
;o milder climes ; or rather do ye urge 
'i caravan your hasty pilgrimage 
o pause at last on more aspiring heights 
Jhan these, and utter your devotion there 
jf ith thunderous voice ? Or are ye jubilant, 
jnd would ye, tracking your proud lord the Sun, 
e present at his setting ; or the pomp 
f Persian mornings would ye fill, and stand 

Poising your splendours high above the heads 
Of worshippers kneeling to their up-risen God ? 
Whence, whence, ye Clouds ! this eagerness of 
speed ? 
Speak, silent creatures. — They are gone, are fled, 
Buried together in yon gloomy mass 
That loads the middle heaven ; and clear and bright 
And vacant doth the region which they thronged 
Appear ; a calm descent of sky conducting 
Down to the unapproachable abyss, 
Down to that hidden gulf from which they rose 
To vanish — fleet as days and months and years, 
Fleet as the generations of mankind, 
Power, glory, empire, as the world itself, 
The lingering world, when time hath ceased to be. 
But the winds roar, shaking the rooted trees, 
And see ! a bright precursor to a train 
Perchance as numerous, overpeers the rock 
That sullenly refuses to partake 
Of the wild impulse. From a fount of hie 
Invisible, the long procession moves 
Luminous or gloomy, welcome to the vale 
Which they are entering, welcome to mine eye 
That sees them, to my soul that owns in them, 
And in the bosom of the firmament 
O'er which they move, wherein they are contained, 
A type of her capacious self and all 
Her restless progeny. 
A humble walk 
Here is my body doomed to tread, this path, 
A little hoary line and faintly traced, 
Work, shall we call it, of the shepherd's foot 
Or of his flock \ — joint vestige of them both. 
I pace it unrepining, for my thoughts 
Admit no bondage and my words have wings. 
Where is the Orphean lyre, or Druid harp, 
To accompany the verse ? The mountain blast 
Shall be our hand of music ; he shall sweep 
The rocks, and quivering trees, and biUowy lake, 
And search the fibres of the caves, and they 
Shall answer, for our song is of the Clouds 
And the wind loves them ; and the gentle gales — 
Which by their aid re-clothe the naked lawn 
With annual verdure, and revive the woods, 
And moisten the parched lips of thirsty flowers — 
Love them ; and every idle breeze of air 
Bends to the favourite burthen. Moon and stars 
Keep their most solemn vigils when the Clouds 
Watch also, shifting peaceably their place 
Like bands of ministering Spirits, or when they lie, 
As if some Protean art the change had wrought, 
In listless quiet o'er the ethereal deep 
Scattered, a Cyclades of various shapes 
And all degrees of beauty. ye Lightnings ! 
n 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Ye are their perilous offspring ; and the Sun — 
Source inexhaustible of life and joy, 
And type of man's far-darting reason, therefore 
In old time worshipped as the god of verse, 
A blazing intellectual deity — 
Loves his own glory in their looks, and showers 
Upon that unsubstantial brotherhood 
Visions with all but beatific light 
Enriched — too transient were they not renewed 
From age to age, and did not, while we gaze 
In silent rapture, credulous desire 
Nourish the hope that memory lacks not power 
To keep the treasure unimpaired. Vain thought ! 
Yet why repine, created as we are 
For joy and rest, albeit to find them only 
IiOdged in the bosom of eternal things ? 

SUGGESTED BY A PICTURE OF THE BIRD 
OF PARADISE. 
The gentlest Poet, with free thoughts endowed, 
And a true master of the glowing strain, 
Might scan the narrow province with disdain 
That to the Painter's skill is here allowed. 
This, this the Bird of Paradise ! disclaim 
The daring thought, forget the name ; 
This the Sun's Bird, whom Glendoveers might 
own 
As no unworthy Partner in their flight 
Through seas of ether, where the ruffling sway 
Of nether air's rude billows is unknown ; 
Whom Sylphs, if e'er for casual pastime they 
Through India's spicy regions wing their way, 
Might bow to as their Lord. What character, 
sovereign Nature ! I appeal to thee, 
Of all thy feathered progeny 
Is so unearthly, and what shape so fair ? 
So richly decked in variegated down, 
Green, sable, shining yellow, shadowy brown, 
Tints softly with each other blended, 
Hues doubtfully begun and ended; 
Or intershooting, and to sight 
Lost and recovered, as the rays of light 
Glance on the conscious plumes touched here and 
there ? 
Full surely, when with such proud gifts of life 
Began the pencil's strife, 
O'erweening Art was caught as in a snare. 

A sense of seemingly presumptuous wrong 
Gave the first impulse to the Poet's song ; 
But, of his scorn repenting soon, he drew 
A juster judgment from a calmer view; 
And, with a spirit freed from discontent, 
Thankfully took an effort that was meant 
Not with God's bounty, Nature's love, to vie, 
Or made with hope to please that inward eye 
Which ever strives in vain itself to satisfy, 
But to recal the truth by some faint trace 
Of power ethereal and celestial grace, 
That in the living Creature find on earth a place. 

A JEWISH FAMILY. 

(IN A SMALL VALLEY OPPOSITE ST. GOAB, TPON THE RHINE. 
Genius of Raphael ! if thy wings 
Might bear thee to this glen, 
With faithful memory left of things 
To pencil dear and pen, 
Thou would'st forego the neighbouring Rhine, 
And all his majesty — 
A studious forehead to incline 
J er this poor family. 
The Mother — her thou must have seen, 
In spirit, ere she came 
To dwell these rifted rocks between, 
Or found on earth a name ; 
An image, too, of that sweet Boy, 
Thy inspirations give — 
Of playfulness, and love, and joy, 
Predestined here to live. 
Downcast, or shooting glances far, 
How beautiful his eyes, 
That blend the nature of the star 
With that of summer skies ! 
I speak as if of sense beguiled ; 
Uncounted months are gone, 
Yet am I with the Jewish Child, 
That exquisite Saint John. 
I see the dark-brown curls, the brow, 
The smooth transparent skin, 
Refined, as with intent to show 
The holiness within ; 

ON THE POWER OF SOUND. 

 

The grace of parting Infancy 
By blushes yet untamed ; 
Age faithful to the mother's knee, 
Nor of her arms ashamed. 
Two lovely Sisters, still and sweet 
As flowers, stand side by side ; 
Their soul-subduing looks might cheat 
The Christian of his pride : 
Such beauty hath the Eternal poured 
Upon them not forlorn, 
Though of a lineage once abhorred, 
Nor yet redeemed from scorn. 
Mysterious safeguard, that, in spite 
Of poverty and wrong, 
Doth here preserve a living light, 
From' Hebrew fountains sprung ; 
That gives this ragged group to cast 
Around the dell a gleam 
Of Palestine, of glory past, 
And proud Jerusalem ! 

ON THE POWER OF SOUND. 
ARGUMENT. 
rheEar addressed, as occupied by a spiritual functionary, 
in communion with sounds, individual, or combined in 
studied harmony. — Sources and effects of those sounds 
(to the close of th Stanza).— The power of music, 
whence proceeding, exemplified in the idiot. — Origin of 
music, and its effect in early ages — how produced (to the 
middle of th Stanza).— The mind recalled to sounds 
: acting casually and severally. — "Wish uttered (th 
Stanza) that these could be united into a scheme or 
! ystem for moral interests and intellectual contempla- 
tion — (Stanza th). The Pythagorean theory of 
numbers and music, with their supposed power over the 
motions of the universe — imaginations consonant with 
such a theory. — "Wish expressed (in th Stanza) realised, 
! in some degree, by the representation of all sounds under 
' the form of thanksgiving to the Creator. — (Last Stanza) 
the destruction of earth and the planetary system — the 
survival of audible harmony, and its support in the 
i Divine Nature, as revealed in Holy Writ. 


;Chy functions are ethereal, 
ii-s if within thee dwelt a glancing mind, 
prgan of vision ! And a Spirit aerial 
nforms the cell of Hearing, dark and blind ; 
ntricate labyrinth, more dread for thought 
.Co enter than oracular cave ; 

Strict passage, through which sighs are brought, 
And whispers for the heart, their slave ; 
And shrieks, that revel in abuse 
Of shivering flesh ; and warbled air, 
Whose piercing sweetness can unloose 
The chains of frenzy, or entice a smile 
Into the ambush of despair ; 
Hosannas pealing down the long-drawn aisle, 
And requiems answered by the pulse that beats 
Devoutly, in life's last retreats ! 

The headlong streams and fountains 
Serve Thee, invisible Spirit, with untired powers ; 
Cheering the wakeful tent on Syrian mountains, 
They lull perchance ten thousand thousand flowers. 
That roar, the prowling lion's Here I am, 
How fearful to the desert wide ! 
That bleat, how tender ! of the dam 
Calling a straggler to her side. 
Shout, cuckoo ! — let the vernal soul 
Go with thee to the frozen zone ; 
Toll from thy loftiest perch, lone bell-bird, toll ! 
At the still hour to Mercy dear, 
Mercy from her twilight throne 
Listening to nun's faint throb of holy fear, 
To sailor's prayer breathed from a darkening sea, 
Or widow's cottage-lullaby. 

Ye Voices, and ye Shadows 
And Images of voice — to hound and horn 
From rocky steep and rock-bestudded meadows 
Flung back, and, in the sky's blue caves, reborn — 
On with your pastime ! till the church-tower bells 
A greeting give of measured glee ; 
And milder echoes from their cells 
Repeat the bridal symphony. 
Then, or far earlier, let us rove 
Where mists are breaking up or gone, 
And from aloft look down into a cove 
Besprinkled with a careless quire, 
Happy milk-maids, one by one 
Scattering a ditty each to her desire, 
A liquid concert matchless by nice Art, 
A stream as if from one full heart. 


Blest be the song that brightens 
The blind man's gloom, exalts the veteran's mirth ; 
Unscorned the peasant's whistling breath, that 
lightens 
His duteous toil of furrowing the green earth. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

For the tired slave, Song lifts the languid oar, 
And bids it aptly fall, with chime 
That beautifies the fairest shore, 
And mitigates the harshest clime. 
Yon pilgrims see — in lagging file 
They move ; but soon the appointed way 
A choral Ave Marie shall beguile, 
And to their hope the distant shrine 
Glisten with a livelier ray : 
Nor friendless he, the prisoner of the mine, 
Who from the well-spring of his own clear breast 
Can draw, and sing his griefs to rest. 
v. 
When civic renovation 
Dawns on a kingdom, and for needful haste 
Best eloquence avails not, Inspiration 
Mounts with a tune, that travels like a blast 
Piping through cave and battlemented tower ; 
Then starts the sluggard, pleased to meet 
That voice of Freedom, in its power 
Of promises, shrill, wild, and sweet ! 
Who, from a martial pageant, spreads 
Incitements of a battle-day, 
Thrilling the unweaponed crowd with plumeless 
heads ? — 
Even She whose Lydian airs inspire 
Peaceful striving, gentle play 
Of timid hope and innocent desire 
Shot from the dancing Graces, as they move 
Fanned by the plausive wings of Love. 
VI. 
How oft along thy mazes, 
Regent of sound, have dangerous Passions trod ! 
Thou, through whom the temple rings with praises, 
And blackening clouds in thunder speak of God, 
Betray not by the cozenage of sense 
Thy votaries, wooingly resigned 
To a voluptuous influence 
That taints the purer, better, mind ; 
But lead sick Fancy to a harp 
That hath in noble tasks been tried ; 
And, if the virtuous feel a pang too sharp, 
Soothe it into patience, — stay 
The uplifted arm of Suicide ; 
And let some mood of thine in firm array 
Knit every thought the impending issue needs, 
Ere mar.tyr burns, or patriot bleeds ! 
vir. 
As Conscience, to the centre 
Of being, smites with irresistible pain 
So shall a solemn cadence, if it enter 
The mouldy vaults of the dull idiot's brain, 

Transmute him to a wretch from quiet hurled — 
Convulsed as by a jarring din ; 
And then aghast, as at the world 
Of reason partially let in 
By concords winding with a sway 
Terrible for sense and soul ! 
Or, awed he weeps, struggling to quell dismay. 
Point not these mysteries to an Art 
Lodged above the starry pole ; 
Pure modulations flowing from the heart 
Of divine Love, where Wisdom, Beauty, Truth 
With Order dwell, in endless youth ? 

Oblivion may not cover 
All treasures hoarded by the miser, Time. 
Orphean Insight ! truth's undaunted lover, 
To the first leagues of tutored passion climb, 
When Music deigned within this grosser sphere 
Her subtle essence to enfold, 
And voice and shell drew forth a tear 
Softer than Nature's self could mould. 
Yet strenuous was the infant Age : 
Art, daring because souls could feel, 
Stirred nowhere but an urgent equipage 
Of rapt imagination sped her march 
Through the realms of woe and weal : 
Hell to the lyre bowed low ; the upper arch 
Rejoiced that clamorous spell and magic verse 
Her wan disasters could disperse. 

The Gift to king Amphion 
That walled a city with its melody 
Was for belief no dream :— thy skill, Arion ! 
Could humanise the creatures of the sea, 
Where men were monsters. A last grace he craves, 
Leave for one chant ; — the dulcet sound 
Steals from the deck o'er willing waves, 
And listening dolphins gather round. 
Self-cast, as with a desperate course, 
'Mid that strange audience, he bestrides 
A proud One docile as a managed horse ; 
And singing, while the accordant hand 
Sweeps his harp, the Master rides ; 
So shall he touch at length a friendly strand, 
And he, with his preserver, shine star-bright 
In memory, through silent night. 

The pipe of Pan, to shepherds 
Couched in the shadow of Msenalian pines, 
Was passing sweet ; the eyeballs of the leopards, 
That in high triumph drew the Lord of vines, 

ON THE POWER OF SOUND. 

 

How did they sparkle to the cymbal's clang ! 
While Fauns and Satyrs beat the ground 
I In cadence, — and Silenus swang 
This way and that, with wild-flowers crowned. 
To life, to life give back thine ear : 
Ye who are longing to be rid 
!Of fable, though to truth subservient, hear 
The little sprinkling of cold earth that fell 
Echoed from the coffin-lid ; 
The convict's summons in the steeple's knell ; 
The vain distress-gun,' from a leeward shore, 
'Repeated — heard, and heard no more ! 

For terror, joy, or pity, 
Vast is the compass and the swell of notes : 
From the babe's first cry to voice of regal city, 
Rolling a solemn sea-like bass, that floats 
iFar as the woodlands — with the trill to blend 
Of that shy songstress, whose love-tale 
Might tempt an angel to descend, 
While hovering o'er the moonlight vale. 
|fe wandering Utterances, has earth no scheme, 
jNo scale of moral music — to unite 
Powers that survive but in the faintest dream 
Df memory ?-^JD that ye might stoop to bear 
Chains, such precious chains of sight 
As laboured minstrelsies through ages wear ! 
p for a balance fit the truth to tell 
Df the Unsubstantial, pondered well ! 

By one pervading spirit 
Of tones and numbers all things are controlled, 
Ka sages taught, where faith was found to merit 
. nidation in that mystery old. 
The heavens, whose aspect makes our minds as still 
Vs they themselves appear to be, 
Enumerable voices fill 
tV'ith everlasting harmony ; 
The towering headlands, crowned with mist, 
Their feet among the billows, know 

That Ocean is a mighty harmonist ; 
Thy pinions, universal Air, 
Ever waving to and fro, 
Are delegates of harmony, and bear 
Strains that support the Seasons in their round ; 
Stern Winter loves a dirge-like sound. 

Break forth into thanksgiving, 
Ye banded instruments of wind and chords ; 
Unite, to magnify the Ever-living, 
Your inarticulate notes with the voice of words ! 
Nor hushed be service from the lowing mead, 
Nor mute the forest hum of noon ; 
Thou too be heard, lone eagle ! freed 
From snowy peak and cloud, attune 
Thy hungry barkings to the hymn 
Of joy, that from her utmost walls 
The six-days' Work, by flaming Seraphim 
Transmits to Heaven ! As Deep to Deep 
Shouting through one valley calls, 
All worlds, all natures, mood and measure keep 
For praise and ceaseless gratulation, poured 
Into the ear of God, their Lord ! 

A Voice to Light gave Being ; 
To Time, and Man his earth-born chronicler ; 
A Voice shall finish doubt and dim foreseeing, 
And sweep away life's visionary stir ; 
The trumpet (we, intoxicate with pride, 
Arm at its blast for deadly wars) 
To archangelic lips applied, 
The grave shall open, quench the stars. 
Silence ! are Man's noisy years 
No more than moments of thy life ? 
Is Harmony, blest queen of smiles and tears, 
With her smooth tones and discords just, 
Tempered into rapturous strife, 
Thy destined bond-slave ? No ! though earth be dust 
And vanish, though the heavens dissolve, her stay 
Is in the Word, that shall not pass away. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

PETER BELL. 
A TALE. 
What 'b in a Name  
Brutus will start a Spirit as soon as Cassar ! 

TO ROBERT SOTJTHEY, ESQ., P.L., etc. etc. 
My Dear Frieni,, 
The Tale of Peter Bell, which I now introduce to your notice, and to that of the rVjIie, 
has, in its Manuscript state, nearly survived its minority :— -for it first saw the light in the summer of . During 
this long interval, pains have been taken at different times to make the production less unworthy of a favourable 
reception ; or, rather, to fit it for filling permanently a station, however humble, in the Literature of our Country. 
This has, indeed, been the aim of all my endeavours in Poetry, which, you know, have been sufficiently laborious 
to prove that I deem the Art not lightly to be approached ; and that the attainment of excellence in it, may laudably 
be made the principal object of intellectual pursuit by any man, who, with reasonable consideration of circumstances, 
has faith in his own impulses. 
The Poem of Peter Bell, as the Prologue will show, was composed under a belief that the Imagination not only does 
not require for its exercise the intervention of supernatural agency, but that, though such agency be excluded, the 
faculty may be called forth as imperiously and for kindred results of pleasure, by incidents, within the compass of 
poetic probability, in the humblest departments of daily life. Since that Prologue was written, you have exhibited 
most splendid effects of judicious daring, in the opposite and usual course. Let this acknowledgment make my peace 
with the lovers of the supernatural ; and I am persuaded it will be admitted, that to you, as a Master in that province 
of the art, the fallowing Tale, whether from contrast or congruity, is not an unappropriate offering. Accept it, then, 
as a public testimony of affectionate admiration from one with whose name yours has been often coupled (to use your 
own words) for evil and for good ; and believe me to be, with earnest wishes that life and health may be granted you to 
complete the many important works in which you are engaged, and with high respect, 
Most faithfully yours, WILLIAM WORDSWORTH. 
Rvdal Mount, April , . 

PROLOGUE. 
There 's something in a flying horse, 
There 's something in a huge balloon ; 
But through the clouds  ' never float 
Until I have a little Boat, 
Shaped like the crescent-moon. 
And now I have a little Boat, 
In shape a very crescent-moon : 
Fast through the clouds my boat can sail ; 
But if perchance your faith should fail, 
Look up — and you shall see me soon ! 
The woods, my Friends, are round you roaring, 
Rocking and roaring like a sea ; 
The noise of danger's in your ears, 
And ye have all a thousand fears 
Both for my little Boat and me ! 
Meanwhile untroubled I admire 
The pointed horns of my canoe ; 
And, did not pity touch my breast, 
To see how ye are all distrest, 
Till my ribs ached, I 'd laugh at you ! 

Away we go, my Boat and I — 
Frail man ne'er sate in such another ; 
Whether among the winds we strive, 
Or deep into the clouds we dive, 
Each is contented with the other. 
Away we go — and what care we 
For treasons, tumults, and for wars ? 
We are as calm in our delight 
As is the crescent-moon so bright 
Among the scattered stars. 
Up goes my Boat among the stars 
Through many a breathless field of light, 
Through many a long blue field of ether, 
Leaving ten thousand stars beneath her : 
Up goes my little Boat so bright ! 
The Crab, the Scorpion, and the Bull — 
We pry among them all ; have shot 
High o'er the red-haired race of Mars, 
Covered from top to toe with scars ; 
Such company I like it not ! 

PETER BELL. 

 

The towns in Saturn are decayed, 
And melancholy Spectres throng them ; — 
The Pleiads, that appear to kiss 
Each other in the vast abyss, 
With ioy I sail among them. 
Swift Mercury resounds with mirth, 
Great Jove is full of stately bowers ; 
But these, and all that they contain, 
What are they to that tiny grain, 
That little Earth of ours ? 
Then back to Earth, the dear green Earth : — 
Whole ages if I here should roam, 
The world for my remarks and me 
Would not a whit the better be ; 
I 've left my heart at home. 
See ! there she is, the matchless Earth ! 
There spreads the famed Pacific Ocean ! 
Old Andes thrusts yon craggy spear 
Through the grey clouds ; the Alps are here, 
Like waters in commotion ! 
Yon tawny slip is Libya's sands ; 
That silver thread the river Dnieper ; 
And look, where clothed in brightest green 
Is a sweet Isle, of isles the Queen ; 
Ye fairies, from all evil keep her ! 
And see the town where I was born ! 
Around those happy fields we span 
In boyish gambols ; — I was lost 
Where I have been, but on this coast 
I feel I am a man. 
Never did fifty things at once 
Appear so lovely, never, never ; — 
How tunefully the forests ring ! 
To hear the earth's soft murmuring 
Thus could I hang for ever ! 
" Shame on you ! " cried my little Boat, 
" Was ever such a homesick Loon, 
Within a living Boat to sit, 
| And make no better use of it ; 
A Boat twin-sister of the crescent-moon ! 
Ne'er in the breast, of full-grown Poet 
Fluttered so faint a heart before ;— 
Was it the music of the spheres 
That overpowered your mortal ears  
— Such din shall trouble them no more. 

These nether precincts do not lack 
Charms of their own ; — then come with me ; 
I want a comrade, and for you 
There 's nothing that I would not do ; 
Nought is there that you shall not see. 
Haste ! and above Siberian snows 
We ' sport amid the boreal morning ; 
Will mingle with her lustres gliding 
Among the stars, the stars now hiding, 
And now the stars adorning. 
I know the secrets of a land 
Where human foot did never stray ; 
Fair is that land as evening skies, 
And cool, though in the depth it lies 
Of burning Africa. 
Or we ' into the realm of Faery, 
Among the lovely shades of things ; 
The shadowy forms of mountains bare, 
And streams, and bowers, and ladies fair, 
The shades of palaces and kings ! 
Or, if you thirst with hardy zeal 
Less quiet regions to explore, 
Prompt voyage shall to you reveal 
How earth and heaven are taught to feel 
The might of magic lore ! " 
"My little vagrant Form of light, 
My gay and beautiful Canoe, 
Well have you played your friendly part ; 
As kindly take what from my heart 
Experience forces — then adieu ! 
Temptation lurks among your words ; 
But, while these pleasures you 're pursuing 
Without impediment or let, 
No wonder if you quite forget 
What on the earth is doing. 
There was a time when all mankind 
Did listen with a faith sincere 
To tuneful tongues in mystery versed ; 
Then Poets fearlessly rehearsed 
The wonders of a wild career. 
Go — (but the world 's a sleepy world, 
And 'tis, I fear, an age too late) 
Take with you some ambitious Youth ! 
For, restless Wanderer ! I, in truth, 
Am all unfit to be your mate. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Long have I loved what I behold, 
The night that calms, the day that cheers ; 
The common growth of mother-earth 
Suffices me — her tears, her mirth, 
Her humblest mirth and tears. 
The dragon's wing, the magic ring, 
I shall not covet for my dower, 
If I along that lowly way 
With sympathetic heart may stray, 
And with a soul of power. 
These given, what more need I desire 
To stir, to soothe, or elevate ? 
What nobler marvels than the mind 
May in life's daily prospect find, 
May find or there create ? 
A potent wand doth Sorrow wield ; 
What spell so strong as guilty Fear ! 
Repentance is a tender Sprite ; 
If aught on earth have heavenly might, 
'Tis lodged within her silent tear. 
But grant my wishes, — let us now 
Descend from this ethereal height ; 
Then take thy way, adventurous Skiff, 
More daring far than Hippogriff, 
And be thy own delight ! 
To the stone-table in my garden, 
Loved haunt of many a summer hour, 
The Squire is come : his daughter Bess 
Beside him in the cool recess 
Sits blooming like a flower. 
With these are many more convened ; 
They know not I have been so far ; — 
I see them there, in number nine, 
Beneath the spreading Weymouth-pine ! 
I see them — there they are ! 
There sits the Vicar and his Dame ; 
And there my good friend, Stephen Otter ; 
And, ere the light of evening fail, 
To them I must relate the Tale 
Of Peter Bell the Potter." 
Off flew the Boat — away she flees, 
Spurning her freight with indignation ! 
And I, as well as I was able, 
On two poor legs, toward my stone-table 
Limped on with sore vexation. 

", here he is !" cried little Bess — 
She saw me at the garden-door ; 
"We 've waited anxiously and long," 
They cried, and all around me throng, 
Full nine of them or more ! 
" Reproach me not — your fears be still — 
Be thankful we again have met ; — 
Resume, my Friends ! within the shade 
Your seats, and quickly shall be paid 
The well-remembered debt." 
I spake with faltering voice, like one 
Not wholly rescued from the pale 
Of a wild dream, or worse illusion ; 
But, straight, to cover my confusion, 
Began the promised Tale. 

PART FIRST. 
All by the moonlight river side 
Groaned the poor Beast — alas ! in vain ; 
The staff was raised to loftier height, 
And the blows fell with heavier weight 
As Peter struck — and struck again. 
"Hold !" cried the Squire, " against the rules 
Of common sense you 're surely sinning ; 
This leap is for us all too bold ; 
Who Peter was, let that be told, 
And start from the beginning." 
"A Potter, Sir, he was by trade," 
Said I, becoming quite collected ; 
"And wheresoever he appeared, 
Full twenty times was Peter feared 
For once that Peter was respected. 
He, two-and-thirty years or more, 
Had been a wild and woodland rover ; 
Had heard the Atlantic surges roar 
On farthest Cornwall's rocky shore, 
And trod the cliffs of Dover. 
And he had seen Caernarvon's towers, 
And well he knew the spire of Sarum ; 
And he had been where Lincoln bell 
Flings o'er the fen that ponderous knell — 
A far-renowned alarum ! 

 In the dialect of the North, a hawker of earthenwar 
is thus designated. 

PETER BELL.  
.. 

At Doncaster, at York, and Leeds, 
i And merry Carlisle had he been ; 
! And all along the Lowlands fair, 
All through the bonny shire of Ayr; 
: And far as Aberdeen. 

At noon, when, by the forest's edge 
He lay beneath the branches high, 
The soft blue sky did never melt 
Into his heart ; he never felt 
The witchery of the soft blue sky ! 

, And he had been at Inverness ; 
And Peter, by the mountain-rills, 
Had danced his round with Highland lasses ; 
, And he had lain beside his asses 
On lofty Cheviot Hills : 

On a fair prospect some have looked 
And felt, as I have heard them say, 
As if the moving time had been 
A thing as steadfast as the scene 
On which they gazed themselves away. 

And he had trudged through Yorkshire dales, 
Among the rocks and winding scars; 
Where deep and low the hamlets lie 
Beneath their little patch of sky 
And little lot of stars : 

Within the breast of Peter Bell 
These silent raptures found no place ; 
He was a Carl as wild and rude 
As ever hue-and-cry pursued, 
As ever ran a felon's race. 

And all along the indented coast, 
Bespattered with the salt-sea foam ; 
\ Where'er a knot of houses lay 
On headland, or in hollow bay ; — 
' Sure never man like him did roam ! 

Of all that lead a lawless life, 
Of all that love their lawless lives, 
In city or in village small, 
He was the wildest far of all ; — 
He had a dozen wedded wives. 

As well might Peter, in the Fleet, 
Have been fast bound, a begging debtor ; — 
! He travelled here, he travelled there ; — 
But not the value of a hair 
Was heart or head the better. 

Nay, start not ! — wedded wives — and twelve ! 
But how one wife could e'er come near him, 
In simple truth I cannot tell ; 
For, be it said of Peter Bell, 
To see him was to fear him. 

He roved among the vales and streams, 
In the green wood and hollow deU ; 
They were his dwellings night and day, — 
But nature ne'er could find the way 
Into the heart of Peter Bell. 

Though Nature could not touch his heart 
By lovely forms, and silent weather, 
And tender sounds, yet you might see 
At once, that Peter Bell and she 
Had often been together. 

In vain, through every changeful year, 
Did Nature lead him as before ; 
A primrose by a river's brim 
A. yellow primrose was to him, 
And it was nothing more. 

A savage wildness round him hung 
As of a dweller out of doors ; 
In his whole figure and his mien 
A savage character was seen 
Of mountains and of dreary moors. 

Small change it made in Peter's heart 
To see his gentle panniered train 
With more than vernal pleasure feeding, 
Where'er the tender grass was leading 
Its earliest green along the lane. 

To all the unshaped half-human thoughts 
Which solitary Nature feeds 
'Mid summer storms or winter's ice, 
Had Peter joined whatever vice 
The cruel city breeds. 

In vain, through water, earth, and air, 
The soul of happy sound was spread, 
When Peter on some April morn, 
Beneath the broom or budding thorn, 
Made the warm earth his lazy bed. 

His face was keen as is the wind 
That cuts along the hawthorn-fence ; 
Of courage you saw little there, 
But, in its stead, a medley air 
Of cunning and of impudence. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

He had a dark and sidelong walk, 
And long and slouching was his gait ; 
Beneath his looks so bare and bold, 
You might perceive, his spirit cold 
Was playing with some inward bait. 
His forehead wrinkled was and furred ; 
A work, one half of which was done 
By thinking of his ' whens' and ' hows ;' 
And half, by knitting of his brows 
Beneath the glaring sun. 
There was a hardness in his cheek, 
There was a hardness in his eye, 
As if the man had fixed his face, 
In many a solitary place, 
Against the wind and open sky ! " 

One night, (and now my little Bess ! 
We 've reached at last the promised Tale ;) 
One beautiful November night, 
When the full moon was shining bright 
Upon the rapid river Swale, 
Along the river's winding banks 
Peter was travelling all alone ; — 
Whether to buy or sell, or led 
By pleasure running in his head, 
To me was never known. 
He trudged along through copse and brake, 
He trudged along o'er hill and dale ; 
Nor for the moon cared he a tittle, 
And for the stars he cared as little, 
And for the murmuring river Swale. 
But, chancing to espy a path 
That promised to cut short the way ; 
As many a wiser man hath done, 
He left a trusty guide for one 
That might his steps betray. 
To a thick wood he soon is brought 
Where cheerily his course he weaves, 
And whistling loud may yet be heard, 
Though often buried, like a bird 
Darkling, among the boughs and leaves. 
But quickly Peter's mood is changed, 
And on he drives with cheeks that burn 
In downright fury and in wrath ; — 
There 's little sign the treacherous path 
Will to the road return ! 

The path grows dim, and dimmer still ; 
Now up, now down, the Rover wends, 
With all the sail that he can carry, 
Till brought to a deserted quarry — 
And there the pathway ends. 
He paused — for shadows of strange shape, 
Massy and black, before him lay ; 
But through the dark, and through the cold, 
And through the yawning fissures old, 
Did Peter boldly press bis way 
Right through the quarry ; — and behold 
A scene of soft and lovely hue ! 
Where blue and grey, and tender green. 
Together make as sweet a scene 
As ever human eye did view. 
Beneath the clear blue sky he saw 
A little field of meadow ground ; 
But field or meadow name it not ; 
Call it of earth a small green plot, 
With rocks encompassed round. 
The Swale flowed under the grey rocks, 
But he flowed quiet and unseen ; — 
You need a strong and stormy gale 
To bring the noises of the Swale 
To that green spot, so calm and green ! 
And is there no one dwelling here, 
No hermit with his beads and glass ? 
And does no little cottage look 
Upon this soft and fertile nook ? 
Does no one five near this green grass ? 
Across the deep and quiet spot 
Is Peter driving through the grass — 
And now has reached the skirting trees ; 
When, turning round his head, he sees 
A solitary Ass. 
" A prize !" cries Peter — but he first 
Must spy about him far and near : 
There 's not a single house in sight, 
No woodman's hut, no cottage light — 
Peter, you need not fear ! 
There 's nothing to be seen but woods, 
And rocks that spread a hoary gleam, 
And this one Beast, that from the bed 
Of the green meadow hangs his head 
Over the silent stream. 

PETER BELL. 

 

His head is with a halter bound; 
The halter seizing, Peter leapt 
Upon the Creature's back, and plied 
With ready heels his shaggy side ; 
But still the Ass Ms station kept. 
Then Peter gave a sudden jerk, 
A jerk that from a dungeon-floor 
Would have pulled up an iron ring ; 
But still the heavy-headed Thing 
Stood just as he had stood before ! 
Quoth Peter, leaping from his seat, 
" There is some plot against me laid ;" 
Once more the little meadow-ground 
And all the hoary cliffs around 
He cautiously surveyed. 
All, all is silent — rocks and woods, 
All still and silent — far and near ! 
Only the Ass, with motion dull, 
Upon the pivot of his skull 
Turns round his long left ear. 
Thought Peter, What can mean all this ? 
Some ugly witchcraft must be here ! 
— Once more the Ass, with motion dull, 
Upon the pivot of his skull 
' Turned round his long left ear. 
Suspicion ripened into dread ; 
■ Yet with deliberate action slow, 
His staff high-raising, in the pride 
Of skill, upon the sounding hide, 
i He dealt a sturdy blow. 
The poor Ass staggered with the shock ; 
And then, as if to take his ease, 
 In quiet uncomplaining mood, 
Upon the spot where he had stood, 
Dropped gently down upon his knees ; 
\ As gently on his side he fell ; 
, And by the river's brink did lie ; 
And, while he lay like one that mourned, 
iThe patient Beast on Peter turned 
His shining hazel eye. 
'Twas but one mild, reproachful look, 
A look more tender than severe ; 
And straight in sorrow, not in dread, 
He turned the eye-ball in his head 
Towards the smooth river deep and clear. 

Upon the Beast the sapling rings ; 
His lank sides heaved, his limbs they stirred ; 
He gave a groan, and then another, 
Of that which went before the brother, 
And then he gave a third. 
All by the moonlight river side 
He gave three miserable groans ; 
And not till now hath Peter seen 
How gaunt the Creature is, — how lean 
And sharp his staring bones ! 
With legs stretched out and stiff he lay : — 
No word of land commiseration 
Fell at the sight from Peter's tongue ; 
With hard contempt his heart was wrung, 
With hatred and vexation. 
The meagre beast lay still as death ; 
And Peter's lips with fury quiver ; 
Quoth he, " You little mulish dog, 
I ' fling your carcass like a log 
Head-foremost down the river !" 
An impious oath confirmed the threat — 
Whereat from the earth on which he lay 
To all the echoes, south and north, 
And east and west, the Ass sent forth 
A long and clamorous bray ! 
This outcry, on the heart of Peter, 
Seems like a note of joy to strike, — 
Joy at the heart of Peter knocks ; 
But in the echo of the rocks 
Was something Peter did not like. 
Whether to cheer his coward breast, 
Or that he could not break the chain, 
In this serene and solemn hour, 
Twined round him by demoniac power, 
To the blind work he turned again. 
Among the rocks and winding crags ; 
Among the mountains far away ; 
Once more the Ass did lengthen out 
More ruefully a deep-drawn shout, 
The hard dry see-saw of his horrible bray ! 
What is there now in Peter's heart ! 
Or whence the might of this strange sound I 
The moon uneasy looked and dimmer, 
The broad blue heavens appeared to glimmer, 
And the rocks staggered all around — 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

From Peter's hand the sapling dropped ! 
Threat has he none to execute ; 

PART SECOND. 

" If any one should come and see 

We left our Hero in a trance, 

That I am here, they ' think," quoth he, 

Beneath the alders, near the river ; 

" I 'm helping this poor dying hrute." 

The Ass is by the river-side, 
And, where the feeble breezes glide, 

He scans the Ass from limb to limb, 

Upon the stream the moonbeams quiver. 

And ventures now to uplift his eyes ; 
More steady looks the moon, and clear, 
More like themselves the rocks appear 
And touch more quiet skies. 

A happy respite ! but at length 
He feels the glimmering of the moon ; 
Wakes with glazed eye, and feebly sighing — 
To sink, perhaps, where he is lying, 

His scorn returns — his hate revives ; 

Into a second swoon ! 

He stoops the Ass's neck to seize 
With malice — that again takes flight ; 
For in the pool a startling sight 
Meets him, among the inverted trees. 

He lifts his head, he sees his staff ; 
He touches — 'tis to him a treasure ! 
Faint recollection seems to tell 
That he is yet where mortals dwell — 

Is it the moon's distorted face I 

A thought received with languid pleasure ! 

The ghost-like image of a cloud ? 
Is it a gallows there portrayed ! 
Is Peter of himself afraid ? 
Is it a coffin, — or a shroud \ 

His head upon his elbow propped, 
Becoming less and less perplexed, 
Sky-ward he looks — to rock and wood — 
And then — upon the glassy flood 

A grisly idol hewn in stone ? 

His wandering eye is fixed. 

Or imp from witch's lap let fall ? 

Thought he, that is the face of one 

Perhaps a ring of shining fairies ? 

In his last sleep securely bound ! 

Such as pursue their feared vagaries 
In sylvan bower, or haunted hall ? 
Is it a fiend that to a stake 
Of fire his desperate self is tethering ? 
Or stubborn spirit doomed to yell 
In solitary ward or cell, 
Ten thousand miles from all his brethren ? 
Never did pulse so quickly throb, 
And never heart so loudly panted ; 
He looks, he cannot choose but look ; 
Like some one reading in a book — 
A book that is enchanted. 
Ah, weil-a-day for Peter Bell ! 
He will be turned to iron soon, 
Meet Statue for the court of Fear ! 
His hat is up — and every hair 
Bristles, and whitens in the moon ! 
He looks, he ponders, looks again ; 
He sees a motion — hears a groan ; 
His eyes will burst — his heart will break — 
He gives a loud and frightful shriek, 
And back he falls, as if his life were flown ! 

So toward the stream his head he bent, 
And downward thrust his staff, intent 
The river's depth to sound. 
Now — like a tempest-shattered bark, 
That overwhelmed and prostrate lies, 
And in a moment to the verge 
Is lifted of a foaming surge — 
Full suddenly the Ass doth rise ! 
His staring bones all shake with joy, 
And close by Peter's side he stands : 
While Peter o'er the river bends, 
The little Ass his neck extends, 
And fondly licks his hands. 
Such life is in the Ass's eyes, 
Such life is in his limbs and ears ; 
That Peter Bell, if he had been 
The veriest coward ever seen, 
Must now have thrown aside his fears. 
The Ass looks on — and to his work 
Is Peter quietly resigned ; 
He touches here — he touches there — 
And now among the dead man's hair 
His sapling Peter has entwined. 

PETER BELL. 

 

He pulls — and looks — and pulls again ; 
And he whom the poor Ass had lost, 
The man who had been four days dead, 
Head-foremost from the river's bed 
Uprises like a ghost ! 
 And Peter draws him to dry land ; 
And through the brain of Peter pass 
I Some poignant twitches, fast and faster ; 
;"No doubt," quoth he, "he is the Master 
! Of this poor miserable Ass ! " 
The meagre Shadow that looks on — 
i What would he now  what is he doing ? 
I His sudden fit of joy is flown, — 
i He on his knees hath laid him down, 
! As if he were his grief renewing ; 
But no — that Peter on his back 
Must mount, he shews well as he can : 
' Thought Peter then, come weal or woe, 
I I ' do what he would have me do, 
I In pity to this poor drowned man. 
; With that resolve he boldly mounts 
: Upon the pleased and thankful Ass ; 
And then, without a moment's stay, 
! That earnest Creature turned away, 
Leaving the body on the grass. 
Intent upon his faithful watch, 
The Beast four days and nights had past ; 
A sweeter meadow ne'er was seen, 
And there the Ass four days had been, 
i Nor ever once did break his fast : 
Yet firm his step, and stout his heart ; 
The mead is crossed- — the quarry's mouth 
Is reached ; but there the trusty guide 
Into a thicket turns aside, 
And deftly ambles towards the south. 
J When hark a burst of doleful sound ! 
: And Peter honestly might say, 
:, The like came never to his ears, 
 Though he has been, full thirty years, 
A rover — night and day ! 
I . 
I 'Tis not a plover of the moors, 
I 'Tis not a bittern of the fen; 
! Nor can it be a barking fox, 
j Nor night-bird chambered in the rocks, 
Nor wild-cat in a woody glen! 

The Ass is startled — and stops short 
Right in the middle of the thicket ; 
And Peter, wont to whistle loud 
Whether alone or in a crowd, 
Is silent as a silent cricket. 
What ails you now, my little Bess ? 
Well may you tremble and look grave ! 
This cry — that rings along the wood, 
This cry — that floats adown the flood, 
Comes from the entrance of a cave : 
I see a blooming Wood-boy there, 
And if I had the power to say 
How sorrowful the wanderer is, 
Your heart would be as sad as his 
Till you had kissed his tears away ! 
Grasping a hawthorn branch in hand, 
All bright with berries ripe and red, 
Into the cavern's mouth he peeps ; 
Thence back into the moonlight creeps ; 
Whom seeks he — whom ?— the silent dead : 
His father ! — Him doth he require — 
Him hath he sought with fruitless pains, 
Among the rocks, behind the trees ; 
Now creeping on his hands and knees, 
Now running o'er the open plains. 
And hither is he come at last, 
When he through such a day has gone, 
By this dark cave to be distrest 
Like a poor bird — her plundered nest 
Hovering around with dolorous moan ! 
Of that intense and piercing cry 
The listening Ass conjectures well; 
Wild as it is, he there can read 
Some intermingled notes that plead 
With touches irresistible. 
But Peter — when he saw the Ass 
Not only stop but turn, and change 
The cherished tenor of his pace 
That lamentable cry to chase — 
It wrought in him conviction strange ; 
A faith that, for the dead man's sake 
And this poor slave who loved him well, 
Vengeance upon his head will fall, 
Some visitation worse than all 
Which ever till this night befel. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Meanwhile the Ass to reach his home, 
Is striving stoutly as he may ; 
But, while he climbs the woody hill, 
The cry grows weak — and weaker still ; 
And now at last it dies away. 
So with his freight the Creature turns 
Into a gloomy grove of beech, 
Along the shade with footsteps true 
Descending slowly, till the two 
The open moonlight reach. 
And there, along the narrow dell, 
A fair smooth pathway you discern, 
A length of green and open road— 
As if it from a fountain flowed — 
Winding away between the fern. 
The rocks that tower on either side 
Build up a wild fantastic scene ; 
Temples like those among the Hindoos, 
And mosques, and spires, and abbey windows, 
And castles all with ivy green ! 
And, while the Ass pursues his way, 
Along this solitary dell, 
As pensively his steps advance, 
The mosques and spires change countenance, 
And look at Peter Bell ! 
That unintelligible cry 
Hath left him high in preparation, — 
Convinced that he, or soon or late, 
This very night will meet his fate — 
And so he sits in expectation ! 
The strenuous Animal hath clomb 
With the green path ; and now he wends 
Where, shining like the smoothest sea, 
In undisturbed immensity 
A level plain extends. 
But whence this faintly-rustling sound 
By which the journeying pair are chased ? 
— A withered leaf is close behind, 
Light plaything for the sportive wind 
Upon that solitary waste. 
When Peter spied the moving thing, 
It only doubled his distress ; 
" Where there is not a bush or tree, 
The very leaves they follow me — 
So huge hath been my wickedness !" 

To a close lane they now are come, 
Where, as before, the enduring Ass 
Moves on without a moment's stop, 
Nor once turns round his head to crop 
A bramble-leaf or blade of grass. 
Between the hedges as they go, 
The white dust sleeps upon the lane ; 
And Peter, ever and anon 
Back-looking, sees, upon a stone, 
Or in the dust, a crimson stain. 



A stain — as of a drop of blood 
By moonlight made more faint and wan ; 
Ha ! why these sinkings of despair ? 
He knows not how the blood comes there— 
And Peter is a wicked man. 
At length he spies a bleeding wound, 
Where he had struck the Ass's head ; 
He sees the blood, knows what it is, — 
A glimpse of sudden joy was his, 
But then it quickly fled ; 
Of him whom sudden death had seized 
He thought, — of thee, faithful Ass ! 
And once again those ghastly pains, 
Shoot to and fro through heart and reins, 
And through his brain like lightning pass. 

PART THIRD. 
I 've heard of one, a gentle Soul, 
Though given to sadness and to gloom, 
And for the fact will vouch, — one night 
It chanced that by a taper's light 
This man was reading in his room ; 
Bending, as you or I might bend 
At night o'er any pious book, 
When sudden blackness overspread 
The snow-white page on which he read, 
And made the good man round him look. 
The chamber walls were dark all round,- 
And to his book he turned again ; 
— The light had left the lonely taper, 
And formed itself upon the paper 
Into large letters — bright and plain ! 
The godly book was in his hand — 
And, on the page, more black than coal, 
Appeared, set forth in strange array, 
A word — which to his dying day 
Perplexed the good man's gentle soul. 

PETER BELL. 

 

The ghostly word, thus plainly seen, 
Did never from his lips depart ; 
But he hath said, poor gentle wight ! 
It brought full many a sin to light 
Out of the bottom of his heart. 
Dread Spirits ! to confound the meek 
Why wander from your course so far, 
Disordering colour, form, and stature ! 
Let good men feel the soul of nature, 
And see things as they are. 
Yet, potent Spirits ! well I know, 
How ye, that play with soul and sense, 
Are not unused to trouble friends 
Of goodness, for most gracious ends — 
And this I speak in reverence ! 
E-ut might I give advice to you, 
Whom in my fear I love so well ; 
From men of pensive virtue go, 
Dread Beings ! and your empire show 
On hearts like that of Peter Bell. 
Your presence often have I felt 
In darkness and the stormy night ; 
And, with like force, if need there be, 
 Ye can put forth your agency 
When earth is calm, and heaven is bright. 
Then, coming from the wayward world, 
: That powerful world in which ye dwell, 
l Come, Spirits of the Mind ! and try 
. To-night, beneath the moonlight sky r , 
' What may be done with Peter Bell ! 
, — , would that some more skilful voice 
My further labour might prevent ! 
Kind Listeners, that around me sit, 
I feel that I am all unfit 
For such high argument. 
I 've played, I 've danced, with my narration ; 
I loitered long ere I began : 
Ye waited then on my good pleasure ; 
Pour out indulgence still, in measure 
As liberal as ye can ! 
Our Travellers, ye remember well, 
Are thridding a sequestered lane ; 
And Peter many tricks is trying, 
And many anodynes applying, 
To ease his conscience of its pain. 

By this his heart is lighter far ; 
And, finding that he can account 
So snugly for that crimson stain, 
His evil spirit up again 
Does like an empty bucket mount. 
And Peter is a deep logician 
Who hath no lack of wit mercurial ; 
" Blood drops — leaves rustle — yet," quoth he, 
" This poor man never, but for me, 
Could have had Christian burial. 
And, say the best you can, 'tis plain, 
That here has been some wicked dealing ; 
No doubt the devil in me wrought ; 
I 'm not the man who could have thought 
An Ass like this was worth the stealing !" 
So from his pocket Peter takes 
His shining horn tobacco-box ; 
And, in a light and careless way, 
As men who with their purpose play, 
Upon the lid he knocks. 
Let them whose voice can stop the clouds, 
Whose cunning eye can see the wind, 
Tell to a curious world the cause 
Why, making here a sudden pause, 
The Ass turned round his head, and grinned. 
Appalling process ! I have marked 
The like on heath, in lonely wood ; 
And, verily, have seldom met 
A spectacle more hideous — yet 
It suited Peter's present mood. 
And, grinning in his turn, his teeth 
He in jocose defiance showed — 
When, to upset his spiteful mirth, 
A murmur, pent within the earth, 
In the dead earth beneath the road, 
Rolled audibly ! it swept along, 
A muffled noise — a rumbling sound ! — 
'Twas by a troop of miners made, 
Plying with gunpowder their trade, 
Some twenty fathoms underground. 
Small cause of dire effect ! for, surely, 
If ever mortal, King or Cotter, 
Believed that earth was charged to quake 
And yawn for his unworthy sake, 
'Twas Peter Bell the Potter. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

But, as an oak in breathless air 
Will stand though to the centre hewn ; 
Or as the weakest things, if frost 
Have stiffened them, maintain their post ; 
So he, beneath the gazing moon !— 
The Beast bestriding thus, he reached 
A spot where, in a sheltering cove, 
A httle chapel stands alone, 
With greenest ivy overgrown, 
And tufted with an ivy grove ; 
Dying insensibly away 
From human thoughts and purposes, 
It seemed — wall, window, roof and tower- 
To bow to some transforming power, 
And blend with the surrounding trees. 
As ruinous a place it was, 
Thought Peter, in the shire of Fife 
That served my turn, when following still 
From land to land a reckless will 
I married my sixth wife ! 
The unheeding Ass moves slowly on, 
And now is passing by an inn 
Brim-full of a carousing crew, 
That make, with curses not a few, 
An uproar and a drunken din. 
I cannot well express the thoughts 
Which Peter in those noises found ; — 
A stifling power compressed his frame, 
While-as a swimming darkness came 
Over that duU and dreary sound. 
For well did Peter know the sound ; 
The language of those drunken joys 
To him, a jovial soul, I ween, 
But a few hours ago, had been 
A gladsome and a welcome noise. 
Now, turned adrift into the past, 
He finds no solace in his course ; 
Like planet-strieken men of yore, 
He trembles, smitten to the core 
By strong compunction and remorse. 
But, more than all, his heart is stung 
To think of one, almost a child ; 
A sweet and playful Highland girl, 
As light and beauteous as a squirrel, 
As beauteous and as wild ! 

Her dwelling was a lonely house, 
A cottage in a heathy dell ; 
And she put on her gown of green, 
And left her mother at sixteen, 
And followed Peter Bell. 
But many good and pious thoughts 
Had she ; and, in the kirk to pray, 
Two long Scotch miles, through rain or snow, 
To kirk she had been used to go, 
Twice every Sabbath-day. 
And, when she followed Peter Bell, 
It was to lead an honest life ; 
For he, with tongue not used to falter, 
Had pledged his troth before the altar 
To love her as Ms wedded wife. 
A mother's hope is hers ; — but soon 
She drooped and pined like one forlorn ; 
From Scripture she a name did borrow ; 
Benoni, or the child of sorrow, 
She called her babe unborn. 
For she had learned how Peter lived, 
And took it in most grievous part ; 
She to the very bone was worn, 
And, ere that httle child was born, 
Died of a broken heart. 
And now the Spirits of the Mind 
Are busy with poor Peter Bell ; 
Upon the rights of visual sense 
Usurping, with a prevalence 
More terrible than magic spell. 
Close by a brake of flowering furze 
(Above it shivering aspens play) 
He sees an unsubstantial creature, 
His very self in form and feature, 
Not four yards from the broad highway : 
And stretched beneath the furze he sees 
The Highland girl — it is no other ; 
And hears her crying as she cried, 
The very moment that she died, 
" My mother ! oh my mother !" 
The sweat pours down from Peter's face, 
So grievous is his heart's contrition ; 
With agony his eye-balls ache 
While he beholds by the furze-brake 
This miserable vision ! 


PETER BELL. 

 

Jalm is the well-deserving brute, 
His peace hath no offence betrayed ; 
ut now, while down that slope he wends, 
\ voice to Peter's ear ascends, 
Resounding from the woody glade : 
The voice, though clamorous as a horn 
Re-echoed by a naked rock, 
!!omes from that tabernacle — List ! 
iiVithin, a fervent Methodist 
s preaching to no heedless flock ! 
: Repent ! repent !" he cries aloud, 
: While yet ye may find mercy ; — strive 
Co love the Lord with all your might ; 
["urn to him, seek him day and night, 
ind save your souls alive ! 
Repent ! repent ! though ye have gone, 
?hrough paths of wickedness and woe, 
Lfter the Babylonian harlot ; 
llnd, though your sins be red as scarlet, 
'hey shall be white as snow !" 
: lvea as he passed the door, these words 
)id plainly come to Peter's ears ; 
Lnd they such joyful tidings were, 
"he joy was more than he could bear ! — 
le melted into tears. 
Iweet tears of hope and tenderness ! 
ind fast they fell, a plenteous shower ! 
iis nerves, his sinews seemed to melt ; 
through all his iron frame was felt 
i gentle, a relaxing, power ! 
'ach fibre of his frame was weak ; 
Veak all the animal within ; 
)iut, in its helplessness, grew mild 
md gentle as an infant child, 
In infant that has known no sin. 
Tis said, meek Beast ! that, through Heaven's grace, 
le not iinmoved did notice now 
'he cross upon thy shoulder scored, 
.'or lasting impress, by the Lord 
J'o whom all human-kind shall bow ; 
jlemorial of his touch— that day 
|VTien Jesus humbly deigned to ride, 
Entering the proud Jerusalem, 
!>y an immeasurable stream 
>f shouting people deified ! 

Meanwhile the persevering Ass, 
Turned towards a gate that hung in view 
Across a shady lane ; his chest 
Against the yielding gate he pressed 
And quietly passed through. 
And up the stony lane he goes ; 
No ghost more softly ever trod ; 
Among the stones and pebbles, he 
Sets down his hoofs inaudibly, 
As if with felt his hoofs were shod. 
Along the lane the trusty Ass 
Went twice two hundred yards or more, 
And no one could have guessed his aim, — 
Till to a lonely house he came, 
And stopped beside the door. 
Thought Peter, 'tis the poor man's home ! 
He listens — not a sound is heard 
Save from the trickling household rill ; 
But, stepping o'er the cottage-sill, 
Forthwith a little Girl appeared. 
She to the Meeting-house was bound 
In hopes some tidings there to gather : 
No glimpse it is, no doubtful gleam ; 
She saw — and uttered with a scream, 
"My father ! here's my father !" 
The very word was plainly heard, 
Heard plainly by the wretched Mother — 
Her joy was like a deep affright: 
And forth she rushed into the light, 
And saw it was another ! 
And, instantly, upon the earth, 
Beneath the full moon shining bright, 
Close to the Ass's feet she fell; 
At the same moment Peter Bell 
Dismounts in most unhappy plight. 
As he beheld the Woman lie 
Breathless and motionless, the mind 
Of Peter sadly was confused ; 
But, though to such demands unused, 
And helpless almost as the blind, 
He raised her up ; and, while he held 
Her body propped against his knee, 
The Woman waked — and when she spied 
The poor Ass standing by her side, 
She moaned most bitterly. 

I 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

" Oh ! God be praised — my heart 's at ease — 
For he is dead — I know it well ! " 
— At this she wept a bitter flood ; 
And, in the best way that he could, 
His tale did Peter tell. 
He trembles — he is pale as death ; 
His voice is weak with perturbation ; 
He turns aside his head, he pauses ; 
Poor Peter from a thousand causes, 
Is crippled sore in his narration. 
At length she learned how he espied 
The Ass in that small meadow-ground ; 
And that her Husband now lay dead, 
Beside that luckless river's bed 
In which he had been drowned. 
A piercing look the Widow cast 
Upon the Beast that near her stands ; 
She sees 'tis he, that 'tis the same ; 
She calls the poor Ass by his name, 
And wrings, and wrings her hands. 
" wretched loss — untimely stroke ! 
If he had died upon his bed ! 
He knew not one forewarning pain ; 
He never will come home again — 
Is dead, for ever dead ! " 
Beside the Woman Peter stands ; 
His heart is opening more and more ; 
A holy sense pervades his mind ; 
He feels what he for human kind 
Had never felt before. 
At length, by Peter's arm sustained, 
The Woman rises from the ground — 
" Oh, mercy ! something must be done, 
My little Rachel, you must run, — 
Some willing neighbour must be found. 
Make haste— my little Rachel — do, 
The first you meet with — bid him come, 
Ask him to lend his horse to-night, 
And this good Man, whom Heaven requite, 
Will help to bring the body home." 
Away goes Rachel weeping loud ; — 
An Infant, waked by her distress, 
Makes in the house a piteous cry; 
And Peter hears the Mother sigh, 
" Seven are they, and all fatherless ! " 

And now is Peter taught to feel 
That man's heart is a holy thing ; 
And Nature, through a world of death, 
Breathes into him a second breath, 
More searching than the breath of spring. 
Upon a stone the Woman sits 
In agony of silent grief — 
From his own thoughts did Peter start ; 
He longs to press her to his heart, 
From love that cannot find relief. 
But roused, as if through every limb 
Had past a sudden shock of dread, 
The Mother o'er the threshold flies, 
And up the cottage stairs she hies, 
And on the pillow lays her burning head. 
And Peter turns his steps aside 
Into a shade of darksome trees, 
Where he sits down, he knows not how, 
With his hands pressed against his brow, 
His elbows on his tremulous knees. 
There, self-involved, does Peter sit 
Until no sign of life he makes, 
As if his mind were sinking deep 
Through years that have been long asleep ! 
The trance is passed away — he wakes ; 
He lifts his head — and sees the Ass 
Yet standing in the clear moonshine ; 
"When shall I be as good as thou? 
Oh ! would, poor beast, that I had now 
A heart but half as good as thine ! " 
But He — who deviously hath sought 
His Father through the lonesome woods, . 
Hath sought, proclaiming to the ear 
Of night his grief and sorrowful fear — 
He comes, escaped from fields and floods ; — 
With weary pace is drawing nigh ; 
He sees the Ass — and nothing living 
Had ever such a fit of joy 
As hath this little orphan Boy, 
For he has no misgiving ! 
Forth to the gentle Ass he springs, 
And up about his neck he climbs ; 
In loving words he talks to him, 
He kisses, kisses face and limb, — 
He kisses him a thousand times ! 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

This Peter sees, while in the shade 
He stood beside the cottage-door ; 
And Peter Bell, the ruffian wild, 
Sobs loud, he sobs even like a child, 
"Oh ! God, I can endure no more ! " 
— Here ends my. Tale : for in a trice 
Arrived a neighbour with his horse ; 
Peter went forth with him straightway ; 
And, with due care, ere break of day, 
Together they brought back the Corse. 

And many years did this poor Ass, 
Whom once it was my luck to see 
Cropping the shrubs of Leming-Lane, 
Help by his labour to maintain 
The Widow and her family. 
And Peter Bell, who, till that night, 
Had been the wildest of his clan, 
Forsook his crimes, renounced his folly, 
And, after ten months' melancholy, 
Became a good and honest man. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

DEDICATION. 


Happy the feeling from the bosom thrown 
 In perfect shape (whose beauty Time shall spare 
• Though a breath made it) like a bubble blown 
< For summer pastime into wanton air ; 
 Happy the thought best likened to a stone 
Of the sea-beach, when, polished with nice care, 
Veins it discovers exquisite and rare, 

Which for the loss of that moist gleam atone 
That tempted first to gather it. That here, 
O chief of Friends ! such feelingsl presenti 
To thy regard, with thoughts so fortunate, 
Were a vain notion ; but the hope is dear, 
That thou, if not with partial joy elate, 
Wilt smile upon this gift with more than mild content ! 

PART I. 

Nuns fret not at their convent's narrow room ; 
And hermits are contented with their cells ; 
And students with their pensive citadels ; 
i Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom, 
' Sit blithe and happy ; bees that soar for bloom, 
: High as the highest Peak of Furness-fells, 
Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells : 
In truth the prison, unto which we doom 
Ourselves, no prison is : and hence for me, 
, In sundry moods, 'twas pastime to be bound 
! Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground ; 
Pleased if some Souls (for such there needs must 
be) 
Who have felt the weight of too much liberty, 
Should find brief solace there, as I have found. 

ADMONITION. 
Intended more particularly for the perusal of those who may have 
happened to he enamoured of some heautiful Place of Retreat, in 
the Country of the Lakes. 
Well may'st thou halt — and gaze with brightening 
eye! 
The lovely Cottage in the guardian nook 
Hath stirred thee deeply ; with its own dear brook, 
Its own small pasture, almost its own sky ! 
But covet not the Abode ; — forbear to sigh, 
As many do, repining while they look ; 
Intruders — who would tear from Nature's book 
This precious leaf, with harsh impiety. 
Think what the Home must be if it were thine, 
Even thine, though few thy wants ! — Roof, window, 
door, 
The very flowers are sacred to the Poor, 
The roses to the porch which they entwine : 
Yea, all, that now enchants thee, from the day 
On which it should be touched, would melt away. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

" Beloved Vale !" I said, " when I shall con 
Those many records of my childish years, 
Remembrance of myself and of my peers 
Will press me down : to think of what is gone 
Will be an awful thought, if life have one." 
But, when into the Vale I came, no fears 
Distressed me ; from mine eyes escaped no tears ; 
Deep thought, or dread remembrance, had I none. 
By doubts and thousand petty fancies crost 
I stood, of simple shame the blushing Thrall ; 
So narrow seemed the brooks, the fields so small ! 
A Juggler's balls old Time about him tossed ; 
I looked, I stared, I smiled, I laughed ; and all 
The weight of sadness was in wonder lost. 


AT APPLETHWAITE, NEAR KESWICK. 
. 
Beaumont ! it was thy wish that I should rear 
A seemly Cottage in tins sunny Dell, 
On favoured ground, thy gift, where I might dwell 
In neighbourhood with One to me most dear, 
That undivided we from year to year 
Might work in our high Calling — a bright hope 
To which our fancies, mingling, gave free scope 
Till checked by some necessities severe. 
And should these slacken, honoured Beaumont ! 
still 
Even then we may perhaps in vain implore 
Leave of our fate thy wishes to fulfil. 
Whether this boon be granted us or not, 
Old Skiddaw will look down upon the Spot 
With pride, the Muses love it evermore. 

Pelion and Ossa flourish side by side, 
Together in immortal books enrolled : 
His ancient dower Olympus hath not sold ; 
And that inspiring Hill, which '< did divide 
Into two ample horns his forehead wide,' 
Shines with poetic radiance as of old ; 
While not an English Mountain we behold 
By the celestial Muses glorified. 
Yet round our sea-girt shore they rise in crowds : 
What was the great Parnassus' self to Thee, 
Mount Skiddaw ? In his natural sovereignty 
Our British Hill is nobler far ; he shrouds 
His double front among Atlantic clouds, 
And pours forth streams more sweet than Castaly. 

There is a little unpretending Rill 
Of limpid water, humbler far than aught 
That ever among Men or Naiads sought 
Notice or name ! — It quivers down the hill, 
Furrowing its shallow way with dubious will ; 
Yet to my mind this scanty Stream is brought 
Oftener than Ganges or the Nile ; a thought 
Of private recollection sweet and still ! 
Months perish with their moons ; year treads on 
year; 
But, faithful Emma ! thou with me canst say 
That, while ten thousand pleasures disappear, 
And flies their memory fast almost as they ; 
The immortal Spirit of one happy day 
Lingers beside that Rill, in vision clear. 



Her only pilot the soft breeze, the boat 
Lingers, but Fancy is well satisfied ; 
With keen-eyed Hope, with Memory, at her side, 
And the glad Muse at liberty to note 
All that to each is precious, as we float 
Gently along ; regardless who shall chide 
If the heavens smile, and leave us free to glide, 
Happy Associates breathing air remote 
From trivial cares. But, Fancy and the Muse, 
Why have I crowded this small bark with you 
And others of your kind, ideal crew ! 
While here sits One whose brightness owes its hues 
To flesh and blood ; no Goddess from above, 
No fleeting Spirit, but my own true Love ? 

The fairest, brightest, hues of ether fade ; 
The sweetest notes must terminate and die ; 
O Friend ! thy flute has breathed a harmony 
Softly resounded through this rocky glade ; 
Such strains of rapture as the Genius played 
In his still haunt on Bagdad's summit high ; 
He who stood visible to Mirza's eye, 
Never before to human sight betrayed. 
Lo, in the vale, the mists of evening spread ! 
The visionary Arches are not there, 
Nor the green Islands, nor the sinning Seas ; 
Yet sacred is to me this Mountain's head, 
Whence I have risen, uplifted on the breeze 
Of harmony, above all earthly care. 

 See the Vision of Mirza in the Spectator. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

UPON THE SIGHT OF A BEAUTIFUL PICTURE, 
Painted by Sir G. H. Beaumont, Bart. 
i Praised be the Art whose subtle power could stay- 
Yon cloud, and fix it in that glorious shape ; 
Nor would permit the thin smoke to escape, 
Nor those bright sunbeams to forsake the day ; 
Which stopped that band of travellers on their way, 
 Ere they were lost within the shady wood ; 
( And showed the Bark upon the glassy flood 
' For ever anchored in her sheltering bay. 
Soul-soothing Art ! whom Morning, Noon-tide, 
Even, 
Do serve with all their changeful pageantry ; 
Thou, with ambition modest yet sublime, 
Here, for the sight of mortal man, hast given 
To one brief moment caught from fleeting time 
The appropriate calm of blest eternity. 

I" Why, Minstrel, these untuneful murmurings — 
Dull, flagging notes that with each other jar V 
" Think, gentle Lady, of a Harp so far 
From its own country, and forgive the strings." 
(A simple answer ! but even so forth springs, 
From the Castalian fountain of the heart, 
The Poetry of Life, and all that Art 
Divine of words quickening insensate things. 
From the submissive necks of guiltless men 
iStretched on the block, the glittering axe recoils ; 
,Sun, moon, and stars, all struggle in the toils 
Of mortal sympathy ; what wonder then 
That the poor Harp distempered music yields 
To its sad Lord, far from his native fields ? 

Aerial Rock — whose solitary brow 
From this low threshold daily meets my sight ; 
When I step forth to hail the morning light ; 
; Or quit the stars with a lingering farewell — how 
.Shall Fancy pay to thee a grateful vow ? 
How, with the Muse's aid, her love attest ? 
—By planting on thy naked head the crest 
Of an imperial Castle, which the plough 
Of main shall not touch. Innocent scheme ! 
I That doth presume no more than to supply 
A grace the sinuous vale and roaring stream 
'Want, through neglect of hoar Antiquity. 
|Rise, then, ye votive Towers ! and catch a gleam 
Df golden sunset, ere it fade and die. 

TO SLEEP. 
gentle Sleep ! do they belong to thee, 
These twinklings of oblivion ? Thou dost love 
To sit in meekness, like the brooding Dove, 
A captive never wishing to be free. 
This tiresome night, Sleep ! thou art to me 
A Fly, that up and down himself doth shove 
Upon a fretful rivulet, now above 
Now on the water vexed with mockery. 
 have no pain that calls for patience, no ; 
Hence am I cross and peevish as a child : 
Am pleased by fits to have thee for my foe, 
Yet ever willing to be reconciled : 
gentle Creature ! do not use me so, 
But once and deeply let me be beguiled. 

Fond words have oft been spoken to thee, Sleep ! 
And thou hast had thy store of tenderest names ; 
The very sweetest, Fancy culls or frames, 
When thankfulness of heart is strong and deep ! 
Dear Bosom-child we call thee, that dost steep 
In rich reward all suffering ; Balm that tames 
All anguish ; Saint that evil thoughts and aims 
Takest away, and into souls dost creep, 
Like to a breeze from heaven. Shall I alone, 
I surely not a man ungently made, 
CaU thee worst Tyrant by which Flesh is crost ? 
Perverse, self-willed to own and to disown, 
Mere slave of them who never for thee prayed, 
Still last to come where thou art wanted most ! 

TO SLEEP. 
A flock of sheep that leisurely pass by, 
One after one ; the sound of rain, and bees 
Murmuring ; the fall of rivers, winds and seas, 
Smooth fields, white sheets of water, and pure sky ; 
I have thought of all by turns, and yet do lie 
Sleepless ! and soon the small birds' melodies 
Mtfst hear, first uttered from my orchard trees ; 
And the first cuckoo's melancholy cry. 
Even thus last night, and two nights more, I lay, 
And could not win thee, Sleep ! by any stealth : 
So do not let me wear to-night away : 
Without Thee what is all the morning's wealth ? 
Come, blessed barrier between day and day, 
Dear mother of fresh thoughts and joyous health ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE WILD DUCK'S NEST. 
The imperial Consort of the Fairy-king 
Owns not a sylvan bower ; or gorgeous cell 
With emerald floored, and with purpureal shell 
Ceilinged and roofed ; that is so fan a thing 
As this low structure, for the tasks of Spring, 
Prepared by one who loves the buoyant swell 
Of the brisk waves, yet here consents to dwell ; 
And spreads in steadfast peace her brooding wing. 
Words cannot paint the o'ershadowing yew-tree 
And dimly-gleaming Nest, — ahollow crown [bough, 
Of golden leaves inlaid with silver down, 
Fine as the mother's softest plumes allow : 
I gazed — and, self-accused while gazing, sighed 
For human-kind, weak slaves of cumbrous pride ! 

WRITTEN UPON A BLANK LEAF IN " THE COMPLETE 
ANGLER." 
While flowing rivers yield a blameless sport, 
Shall live the name of Walton : Sage benign ! 
Whose pen, the mysteries of the rod and line 
Unfolding, did not fruitlessly exhort 
To reverend watching of each still report 
That Nature utters from her rural shrine. 
Meek, nobly versed in simple discipline — 
He found the longest summer day too short, 
To his loved pastime given by sedgy Lee, 
Or down the tempting maze of Shawford brook — 
Fairer than life itself, in this sweet Book, 
The cowslip-bank and shady willow-tree ; 
And the fresh meads — where flowed, from every 
Of his full bosom, gladsome Piety ! [nook 

TO THE POET, JOHN DYER. 
Bard of the Fleece, whose skilful genius made 
That work a living landscape fair and bright ; 
Nor hallowed less with musical delight 
Than those soft scenes through which thy child- 
hood strayed, 
Those southern tracts of Cambria, ' deep embayed, 
With green hills fenced, with ocean's murmur lull'd;' 
Though hasty Fame hath many a chaplet culled 
For worthless brows, while in the pensive shade 
Of cold neglect she leaves thy head ungraced, 
Yet pure and powerful minds, hearts meek and still, 
A grateful few, shall love thy modest Lay, 
Long as the shepherd's bleating flock shall stray 
O'er naked Snowdon's wide aerial waste ; 
Long as the thrush shall pipe on Grongar Hill ! 

ON THE DETRACTION WHICH FOLLOWED THE PUBLI- 
CATION OF A CERTAIN POEM. 

A Book came forth of late, called Peter Bell ; 
Not negligent the style ; — the matter ? — good 
As aught that song records of Robin Hood ; 
Or Roy, renowned through many a Scottish dell ; 
But some (who brook those hackneyed themes 
full well, 
Nor heat, at Tarn o' Shanter's name, their blood) 
Waxed wroth, and with foul claws,, a harpy brood, 
On Bard and Hero clamorously fell. 
Heed not, wild Rover once through heath and glen, 
Who mad'st at length the better life thy choice, 
Heed not such onset ! nay, if praise of men 
To thee appear not an unmeaning voice, 
Lift up that grey-haired forehead, and rejoice 
In the just tribute of thy Poet's pen ! 

Grief, thou hast lost an ever ready friend 
Now that the cottage Spinning-wheel is mute ; 
And Care — a comforter that best could suit 
Her froward mood, and softliest reprehend ; 
And Love — a charmer's voice, that used to lend, 
More efficaciously than aught that flows 
From harp or lute, kind influence to compose 
The throbbing pulse — else troubled without end : 
Even Joy could tell, Joy craving truce and rest 
From her own overflow, what power sedate 
On those revolving motions did await 
Assiduously — to soothe her aching breast ; 
And, to a point of just relief, abate 
The mantling triumphs of a day too blest. 


to s. H. 
Excuse is needless when with love sincere 
Of occupation, not by fashion led, [spread ; 
Thou turn'st the Wheel that slept with dust o'er- 
My nerves from no such murmur shrink, — tho' near, 
Soft as the Dorhawk's to a distant ear, 
When twilight shades darken the mountain's head. 
Even She who toils to spin our vital thread 
Might smile on work, Lady, once so dear 
To household virtues. Venerable Art, 
Torn from the Poor ! yet shall kind Heaven protect 
Its own ; though Rulers, with undue respect, 
Trusting to crowded factory and mart 
And proud discoveries of the intellect, 
Heed not the pillage of man's ancient heart. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

IMPOSED IN ONE OF THE VA'LLEYS OF WESTMORE- 
LAND, ON EASTER SUNDAY. 
With each recurrence of this glorious morn 
That saw the Saviour in his human frame 
ftise from the dead, erewhile the Cottage-dame 
?ut on fresh raiment — till that hour unworn : 
(Domestic hands the home-bred wool had shorn, 
Ind she who span it culled the daintiest fleece, 
In thoughtful reverence to the Prince of Peace, 
jiVhose temples bled beneath the platted thorn. 
ji. blest estate when piety sublime 
These humble props disdained not ! green dales ! 
>ad may I be who heard your sabbath chime 
When Art's abused inventions were unknown ; 
iind Nature's various wealth was all your own ; 
i.nd benefits were weighed in Reason's scales ! 

DECAY OF PIETY. 
I)ft have I seen, ere Time had ploughed my cheek, 
Matrons and Sires — who, punctual to the call 
|)f their loved Church, on fast or festival 
Through the long year the House of Prayer would 
y Christmas snows, by visitation bleak [seek : 
; ')f Easter winds, unscared, from hut or hall 
They came to lowly bench or sculptured stall, 
,ut with one fervour of devotion meek. 
! see the places where they once were known, 
ind ask, surrounded even by kneeling crowds, 
Is ancient Piety for ever flown ? 
'Uas ! even then they seemed like fleecy clouds 
Chat, struggling through the western sky, have won 
Their pensive light from a departed sun ! 

(COMPOSED ON THE EVE OF THE MARRIAGE OF A 
FRIEND IN THE VALE OF GRASMERE, . 
JiVhat need of clamorous bells, or ribands gay, 
These humble nuptials to proclaim or grace ? 
Angels of love, look down upon the place ; 
Shed on the chosen vale a sun-bright day ! 
fet no proud gladness would the Bride display 
iven for such promise : — serious is her face, 
Modest her mien ; and she, whose thoughts keep pace 
With gentleness, in that becoming way 
Fill thank you. Faultless does the Maid appear ; 
Ko disproportion in her soul, no strife : 
,ut, when the closer view of wedded life 
Hath shown that nothing human can be clear 
!From frailty, for that insight may the Wife 
j r ° her indulgent Lord become more dear. 

XXIV. 
FROM THE ITALIAN OF MICHAEL ANGELO. 
I. 
Yes ! hope may with my strong desire keep pace, 
And I be undeluded, unbetrayed ; 
For if of our affections none finds grace 
In sight of Heaven, then, wherefore hath God made 
The world which we inhabit ? Better plea 
Love cannot have, than that in loving thee 
Glory to that eternal Peace is paid, 
Who such divinity to thee imparts 
As hallows and makes pure all gentle hearts. 
His hope is treacherous only whose love dies 
With beauty, which is varying every hour ; 
But, in chaste hearts uninfluenced by the power 
Of outward change, there blooms a deathless flower, 
That breathes on earth the air of paradise. 
xxv. 
FROM THE SAME. 
II. 
No mortal object did these eyes behold 
When first they met the placid light of thine, 
And my Soul felt her destiny divine, 
And hope of endless peace in me grew bold : 
Heaven-born, the Soul a heaven-ward course must 
Beyond the visible world she soars to seek [hold ; 
(For what delights the sense is false and weak) 
Ideal Form, the universal mould. 
The wise man, I affirm, can find no rest 
In that which perishes : nor will he lend 
His heart to aught which doth on time depend. 
'Tis sense, unbridled will, and not true love, 
That kills the soul : love betters what is best, 
Even here below, but more in heaven above. 

FROM THE SAME. TO THE SUPREME BEING. 
in. 
The prayers I make will then be sweet indeed 
If Thou the spirit give by which I pray : 
My unassisted heart is barren clay, 
That of its native self can nothing feed : 
Of good and pious works thou art the seed, 
That quickens only where thou say'st it may : 
Unless Thou shew to us thine own true way 
No man can find it : Father ! Thou must lead. 
Do Thou, then, breathe those thoughts into my mind 
By which such virtue may in me be bred 
That in thy holy footsteps I may tread ; 
The fetters of my tongue do Thou unbind, 
That I may have the power to sing of thee, 
And sound thy praises everlastingly. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Surprised by joy — impatient as the Wind 
I turned to share the transport — Oh ! with whom 
But Thee, deep buried in the silent tomb, 
That spot which no vicissitude can find ? 
Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind- 
But how could I forget thee ? Through what power, 
Even for the least division of an hour, 
Have I been so beguiled as to be blind 
To my most grievous loss ? — That thought's return 
Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore, 
Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn, 
Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more ; 
That neither present time, nor years unborn 
Could to my sight that heavenly face restore. 

Methought I saw the footsteps of a throne 
Which mists and vapours from mine eyes did 
shroud — 
Nor view of who might sit thereon allowed ; 
But all the steps and ground about were strown 
With sights the ruefullest that flesh and bone 
Ever put on ; a miserable crowd, 
Sick, hale, old, young, who cried before that cloud, 
" Thou art our king, Death ! to thee we groan." 
Those steps I clomb ; the mists before me gave 
Smooth way ; and I beheld the face of one 
Sleeping alone within a mossy cave, 
With her face up to heaven ; that seemed to have 
Pleasing remembrance of a thought foregone ; 
A lovely Beauty in a summer grave ! 

NOVEMBER, . 
ii. 
Even so for me a Vision sanctified 
The sway of Death ; long ere mine eyes had seen 
Thy countenance — the still rapture of thy mien — 
When thou, dear Sister ! wert become Death's 
No trace of pain or languor could abide [Bride : 
That change : — age on thy brow was smoothed — 
thy cold 
Wan cheek at once was privileged to unfold 
A loveliness to living youth denied. 
Oh ! if within me hope should e'er dec'ine, 
The lamp of faith, lost Friend ! too faintly burn ; 
Then may that heaven-revealing smile of thine, 
The bright assurance, visibly return : 
And let my spirit in that power divine 
Rejoice, as, through that power, it ceased to mourn. 



It is a beauteous evening, calm and free, 
The holy time is quiet as a Nun 
Breathless with adoration ; the broad sun 
Is sinking down in its tranquillity ; 
The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the Sea : 
Listen ! the mighty Being is awake, 
And doth with his eternal motion make 
A sound like thunder — everlastingly. 
Dear Child ! dear Girl ! that walkest with me 
here, 
If thou appear untouched by solemn thought, 
Thy nature is not therefore less divine : 
Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year ; 
And worship' st at the Temple's inner shrine, 
God being with thee when we know it not 



Where lies the Land to which yon Ship must go ! 
Fresh as a lark mounting at break of day, 
Festively she puts forth in trim array ; 
Is she for tropic suns, or polar snow ? 
What boots the inquiry ? — Neither friend nor foe 
She cares for ; let her travel where she may, 
She finds familiar names, a beaten way 
Ever before her, and a wind to blow. 
Yet still I ask, what haven is her mark ? 
And, almost as it was when ships were rare, 
(From time to time, like Pilgrims, here and there 
Crossing the waters) doubt, and something dark, 
Of the old Sea some reverential fear, 
Is with me at thy farewell, joyous Bark ! 

XXX,, 
With Ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh, 
Like stars in heaven, and joyously it showed; 
Some lying fast at anchor in the road, 
Some veering up and down, one knew not why. 
A goodly Vessel did I then espy 
Come like a giant from a haven broad ; 
And lustily along the bay she strode, 
Her ta,ckling rich, and of apparel high. 
This Ship was nought to me, nor I to her, 
Yet I pursued her with a Lover's look ; 
This Ship to all the rest did I prefer : 
When will she turn, and whither ? She will 
No tarrying ; where She comes the winds mu-t 
stir: 
On went She, and due north her journey took. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

he world is too much with us ; late and soon, 
etting and spending, we lay waste our powers : 
ittle we see in Nature that is ours ; 
e have given our hearts away, a sordid boon ! 
Ills Sea that bares her bosom to the moon ; 
lie winds that will be howling at all hours, 
nd are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers ; 
for this, for every thing, we are out of tune ; 
 moves us not. — Great God ! I 'd rather be 
Pagan suckled in a creed outworn ; 
) might I, standing on this pleasant lea, 
ave glimpses that would make me less forlorn ; 
ave sight of Proteus rising from the sea ; 
r hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn. 

volant Tribe of Bards on earth are found, 
r ho, while the flattering Zephyrs round them 
play, 
l ' coignes of vantage ' hang their nests of clay ; 
ow quickly from that aery hold unbound, 
iiist for oblivion ! To the solid ground 
£ nature trusts the Mind that builds for aye ; 
.mvinced that there, there only, she can lay 
! cure foundations. As the year runs round, 
part she toils within the chosen ring ; 
■■ liile the stars shine, or while day's purple eye 
j gently closing with the flowers of spring ; 
here even the motion of an Angel's wing 
i : ould interrupt the intense tranquillity 
' silent hills, and more than silent sky. 

xxxv. 
>Veak. is the will of Man, his judgment blind ; 
.lemembrance persecutes, and Hope betrays ; 
leavy is woe ; — and joy, for human-kind, 
\ mournful thing, so transient is the blaze ! ' 
ms might he paint our lot of mortal days 
j'ho wants the glorious faculty assigned 
p elevate the more-than-reasoning Mind, 
id colour life's dark cloud with orient rays. 
Imagination is that sacred power, 
pagination lofty and refined : 
|is hers to pluck the amaranthine flower 
j: Faith, and round the Sufferer's temples bind 
, reaths that endure affliction's heaviest shower, 
nd do not shrink from sorrow's keenest wind. 

TO THE MEMORY OF RAISLEY CALVERT. 
Calvert ! it must not be unheard by them 
Who may respect my name, that I to thee 
Owed many years of early liberty. 
This care was thine when sickness did condemn 
Thy youth to hopeless wasting, root and stem — 
That I, if frugal and severe, might stray 
Where'er I liked ; and finally array 
My temples with the Muse's diadem. 
Hence, if in freedom I have loved the truth ; 
If there be aught of pure, or good, or great, 
In my past verse ; or shall be, in the lays 
Of higher mood, which now I meditate ; — 
It gladdens me, worthy, short-lived, Youth ! 
To think how much of this will be thy praise. 

PART II. 
r. 
Scorn not the Sonnet ; Critic, you have frowned, 
Mindless of its just honours ; with this key 
Shakspeare unlocked his heart ; the melody 
Of this small lute gave ease to Petrarch's wound ; 
A thousand times this pipe did Tasso sound ; 
With it Camoens soothed an exile's grief ; 
The Sonnet glittered a gay myrtle leaf 
Amid the cypress with which Dante crowned 
His visionary brow : a glow-worm lamp, 
It cheered mild Spenser, called from Faery-land 
To struggle through dark ways ; and, when a damp 
Fell round the path of Milton, in his hand 
The Thing became a trumpet ; whence he blew 
Soul-animating strains — alas, too few ! 

How sweet it is, when mother Fancy rocks 
The wayward brain, to saunter through a wood ! 
An old place, full of many a lovely brood, 
Tall trees, green arbours, and ground-flowers in 
flocks ; 
And wild rose tip-toe upon hawthorn stocks, 
Like a bold Girl, who plays her agile pranks 
AtWakes and Fairs with wandering Mountebanks, — 
When she stands cresting the Clown's head, and 
The crowd beneath her. Verily I think, [mocks 
Such place to me is sometimes like a dream 
Or map of the whole world : thoughts, link by link, 
Enter through ears and eyesight, with such gleam 
Of all things, that at last in fear I shrink, 
And leap at once from the delicious stream. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

TO B. R. HAYDON. 
High is our calling, Friend ! — Creative Art 
(Whether the instrument of words she use, 
Or pencil pregnant with ethereal hues,) 
Demands the service of a mind and heart, 
Though sensitive, yet, in their weakest part, 
Heroically fashioned to infuse 
Faith in the whispers of the lonely Muse, 
While the whole world seems adverse to desert. 
And, oh ! when Nature sinks, as oft she may, 
Through long-lived pressure of obscure distress, 
Still to be strenuous for the bright reward, 
And in the soul admit of no decay, 
Brook no continuance of weak-mindedness — 
Great is the glory, for the strife is hard ! 

From the dark chambers of dejection freed, 
Spurning the unprofitable yoke of care, 
Rise, Gillies, rise : the gales of youth shall bear 
Thy genius forward like a winged steed. 
Though bold Bellerophon (so Jove decreed 
In wrath) fell headlong from the fields of air, 
Yet a rich guerdon waits on minds that dare, 
If aught be in them of immortal seed, 
And reason govern that audacious flight 
Which heaven-ward they direct. — Then droop not 
thou, 
Erroneously renewing a sad vow 
In the low dell 'mid Roslin's faded grove : 
A cheerful life is what the Muses love, 
A soai'ing spirit is their prime delight. 

Fair Prime of life ! were it enough to gild 
With ready sunbeams every straggling shower ; 
And, if an unexpected cloud should lower, 
Swiftly thereon a rainbow arch to build 
For Fancy's errands,— then, from fields half-tilled 
Gathering green weeds to mix with poppy flower, 
Thee might thy Minions crown, and chant thy 
power, 
Unpitied by the wise, all censure stilled. 
Ah ! show that worthier honours are thy due ; 
Fair Prime of life ! arouse the deeper heart ; 
Confirm the Spirit glorying to pursue 
Some path of steep ascent and lofty aim ; 
And, if there be a joy that slights the claim 
Of grateful memory, bid that joy depart. 

I watch, and long have watched, with calm reTet 
Yon slowly-sinking star — immortal Sire 
(So might he seem) of all the glittering quire ! 
Blue ether still surrounds him — yet— and yet ; 
But now the horizon's rocky parapet 
Is reached, where, forfeiting his bright attire, 
He burns — transmuted to a dusky fire — 
Then pays submissively the appointed debt 
To the flying moments, and is seen no more. 
Angels and gods ! We struggle with our fate, 
While health, power, glory, from their height 
decline, 
Depressed ; and then extinguished : and our state. 
In this, how different, lost Star, from thine, 
That no to-morrow shall our beams restore ! 

I heard (alas ! 't was only in a dream) 
Strains — which, as sage Antiquity believed, 
By waking ears have sometimes been received 
Wafted adown the wind from lake or stream ; 
A most melodious requiem, a supreme 
And perfect harmony of notes, achieved 
By a fair Swan on drowsy billows heaved, 
O'er which her pinions shed a silver gleam. 
For is she not the votary of Apollo  
And knows she not, singing as he inspires, 
That bliss awaits her which the ungenial Hollow 
Of the dull earth partakes not, nor desires ? 
Mount, tuneful Bird, and join the immortal quires !| 
She soared — and I awoke, struggling in vain tcl 
follow. 

RETIREMENT. 
If the whole weight of what we think and feel, 
Save only far as thought and feeling blend 
With action, were as nothing, patriot Friend ! 
From thy remonstrance would be no appeal ; 
But to promote and fortify the weal 
Of our own Being is her paramount end ; 
A truth which they alone shall comprehend 
Who shun the mischief which they cannot i.'cal. 
Peace in these feverish times is sovereign bliss: 
Here, with no thirst but what the stream can Blake 
And startled only by the rustling brake, 
Cool air I breathe ; while the unincumbered Mind 
By some weak aims at services assigned 
To gentle Natures, thanks not Heaven amiss. 

 See the Phsedon of Plato, by which this Sonnet w.i I 
suggested. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

)T Love, not War, nor the tumultuous swell 
■ civil conflict, nor the wrecks of change, 
:>r Duty struggling with afflictions strange — 
it these alone inspire the tuneful shell ; 
It where untroubled peace and concord dwell, 
' ere also is the Muse not loth to range, 
atching the twilight smoke of cot or grange, 
,Jyward ascending from a woody dell. 
j;ek aspirations please her, lone endeavour, 
. id sage content, and placid melancholy ; 
i e loves to gaze upon a crystal river — 
! iphanous because it travels slowly ; 
lift is the music that would charm for ever ; 
' e flower of sweetest smell is shy and lowly. 

.ek the concentred hazels that enclose 
' ( n old grey Stone, protected from the ray 
(Inoontide suns : — and even the beams that play 
. d giarice, while wantonly the rough wind blows, 
t e seldom free to touch the moss that grows 
 on that roof, amid embowering gloom, 
'e very image framing of a Tomb, 
J which some ancient Chieftain finds repose 
/long the lonely mountains. — Live, ye trees ! 
id thou, grey Stone, the pensive likeness keep 
< a dark chamber where the Mighty sleep : 
f more than Fancy to the influence bends 
hen solitary Nature condescends 
' mimic Time's forlorn humanities. 

[POSED AFTER A JOURNEY ACROSS THE HAMBLETON 
HILLS, YORKSHIRE. 
RK and more dark the shades of evening fell ; 
Be wished-for point was reached— but at an hour 
lien little could be gained from that rich dower 
 prospect, whereof many thousands tell. 
t did the glowing west with marvellous power 
lute us ; there stood Indian citadel, 
'.oaple of Greece, and minster with its tower 
istantially expressed — a place for bell 
I clock to toU from ! Many a tempting isle, 
;-th groves that never were imagined, lay 
jid seas how steadfast ! objects all for the eye 
 silent rapture ; but we felt the while 
p should forget them ; they are of the sky, 
•id from our earthly memory fade away. 

■ they are of the sky, 

And from our earthly memory fade away.' 
Those words were uttered as in pensive mood 
We turned, departing from that solemn sight : 
A contrast and reproach to gross delight, 
And life's unspiritual pleasures daily wooed ! 
But now upon this thought I cannot brood ; 
It is unstable as a dream of night ; 
Nor will I praise a cloud, however bright, 
Disparaging Man's gifts, and proper food. 
Grove, isle, with every shape of sky-built dome, 
Though clad in colours beautiful and pure, 
Find in the heart of man no natural home : 
The immortal Mind craves objects that endure : 
These cleave to it ; from these it cannot roam, 
Nor they from it : their fellowship is secure. 

SEPTEMBER,  J . 
While not a leaf seems faded ; while the fields, 
With ripening harvest prodigally fair, 
In brightest sunshine bask ; this nipping air, 
Sent from some distant clime where Winter wields 
His icy scimitar, a foretaste yields 
Of bitter change, and bids the flowers beware ; 
And whispers to the silent birds, " Prepare 
Against the threatening foe your trustiest shields." 
For me, who under kindlier laws belong 
To Nature's tuneful quire, this rustling dry 
Through leaves yet green, and yon crystalline sky, 
Announce a season potent to renew, 
Mid frost and snow, the instinctive joys of song, 
And nobler cares than listless summer knew. 

NOVEMBER . 
How clear, how keen, how marvellously bright 
The effluence from yon distant mountain's head, 
Which, strewn with snow smooth as the sky can 
shed, 
Shines like another sun — on mortal sight 
Uprisen, as if to check approaching Night, 
And all her twinkling stars. Who now would tread, 
If so he might, yon mountain's glittering head — 
Terrestrial, but a surface, by the flight 
Of sad mortality's earth-sullying wing, 
Unswept, unstained ? Nor shall the aerial Powers 
Dissolve that beauty, destined to endure, 
White, radiant, spotless, exquisitely pure, 
Through all vicissitudes, till genial Spring 
Has filled the laughing vales with welcome flowers. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

COMPOSED DURING A STORM. 
One who was suffering tumult in his soul 
Yet failed to seek the sure relief of prayer, 
Went forth — his course surrendering to the care 
Of the fierce wind, while mid-day lightnings prowl 
Insidiously, untimely thunders growl ; 
While trees, dim-seen, in frenzied numhers, tear 
The lingering remnant of their yellow hair, 
And shivering wolves, surprised with darkness, howl 
As if the sun were not. He raised his eye 
Soul-smitten ; for, that instant, did appear 
Large space (mid dreadful clouds) of purest sky, 
An azure disc — shield of Tranquillity ; % 
Invisible, unlooked-for, minister 
Of providential goodness ever nigh ! 

TO A SNOW-DROP. 
Lone Flower, hemmed in with snows and white as 
But hardier far, once more I see thee bend [they 
Thy forehead, as if fearful to offend, 
Like an unhidden guest. Though day by day, 
Storms, sallying from the mountain-tops, way-lay 
The rising sun, and on the plains descend ; 
Yet art thou welcome, welcome as a friend 
Whose zeal outruns his promise ! Blue-eyed May 
Shall soon behold this border thickly set 
With bright jonquils, their odours lavishing 
On the soft west-wind and his frolic peers ; 
Nor will I then thy modest grace forget, 
Chaste Snow-drop, venturous harbinger of Spring, 
And pensive monitor of fleeting years ! 

TO THE LADY MARY LOWTHER. 
W ith a selection from the Poems of Anne, Countess of Winchilsea; 
and extracts of similar character from other Writers ; transcribed 
by a female friend. 
Lady ! I rifled a Parnassian Cave 
(But seldom trod) of mildly-gleaming ore ; 
And culled, from sundry beds, a lucid store 
Of genuine crystals, pure as those that pave 
The azure brooks, where Dian joys to lave 
Her spotless limbs ; and ventured to explore 
Dim shades — for reliques, upon Lethe's shore, 
Cast up at random by the sullen wave. 
To female hands the treasures were resigned ; 
And lo this Work !- — a grotto bright and clear 
From stain or taint ; in which thy blameless mind 
May feed on thoughts though pensive not austere ; 
Or, if thy deeper spirit be inclined 
To holy musing, it may enter here. 


TO LADY BEAUMONT. 
Lady ! the songs of Spring were in the grove 
While I was shaping beds for winter flowers ; 
While I was planting green unfading bowci s, 
And shrubs — to hang upon the warm alcove, 
And sheltering wall ; and still, as Fancy wove 
The dream, to time and nature's blended powen 
I gave this paradise for winter hours, 
A labyrinth, Lady ! which your feet shall rove. 
Yes ! when the sun of life more feebly shines, 
Becoming thoughts, I trust, of solemn gloom 
Or of high gladness you shall hither bring ; 
And these perennial bowers and inurmurijig jiint 
Be gracious as the music and the bloom 
And all the mighty ravishment of spring. 

There zs a pleasure in poetic pains 
Wliich only Poets know; — 't was rightly said ; 
Whom could the Muses else allure to tread 
Their smoothest paths, to wear their lightest ciiai: ■ 
When happiest Fancy has inspired the strains, 
How oft the malice of one luckless word 
Pursues the Enthusiast to the social board, 
Haunts him belated on the silent plains ! 
Yet he repines not, if his thought stand clear, 
At last, of hindrance and obscurity, 
Fresh as the star that crowns the brow of morn ; 
Bright, speckless, as a softly-moulded tear 
The moment it has left the virgin's eye, 
Or rain-drop lingering on the pointed thorn. 

The Shepherd, looking eastward, softly said, 
" Bright is thy veil, Moon, as thou art bright ! 
Forthwith, that little cloud, in ether spread 
And penetrated all with tender light, 
She cast away, and showed her fulgent head 
Uncovered ; dazzling the Beholder's sight 
As if to vindicate her beauty's right, 
Her beauty thoughtlessly disparaged. 
Meanwhile that veil, removed or thrown asUc. 
Went floating from her, darkening as it went ; 
And a huge mass, to bury or to hide, 
Approached this glory of the firmament ; 
Who meekly yields, and is obscured — content 
With one calm triumph of a modest pride. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

' hen haughty expectations prostrate he, 
jii grandeur crouches like a guilty thing, 
('■; shall the lowly weak, till nature bring 
J iture release, in fair society 
J Wive, and Fortune's utmost anger try ; 
] ie these frail snow-drops that together cling, 
I d nod their helmets, smitten by the wing 
(. many a furious whirl-blast sweeping by. 
• serve the faithful flowers ! if small to great 
j iy lead the thoughts, thus struggling used to stand 
' e Emathian phalanx, nobly obstinate ; 
. d so the bright immortal Theban band, 
tiom onset, fiercely urged at Jove's command 
'. ght overwhelm, but could not separate ! 

 il, Twilight, sovereign of one peaceful hour! 
Bt dull art Thou as undiscerning Night ; 
]|t studious only to remove from sight 
ly's mutable distinctions. — Ancient Power ! 
lijiis did the waters gleam, the mountains lower, 
r .j the rude Briton, when, in wolf-skin vest" 
Ire roving wild, he laid him down to rest 
( the bare rock, or through a leafy bower 
Joked ere his eyes were closed. By him was seen 
  self-same Vision which we now behold, 
j thy meek bidding, shadowy Power! brought 
forth ; 
 se mighty barriers, and the gulf between ; 
j  flood, the stars, — a spectacle as old 
i'the beginning of the heavens and earth ! 

I th how sad steps, Moon, thou climb' st the sky, 
I )w silently, and with how wan a face !' 
Here art thou  Thou so often seen on high 
I aning among the clouds a Wood-nymph's race ! 
I happy Nuns, whose common breath 's a sigh 
^ lich they would stifle, move at such a pace ! 
northern Wind, to call thee to the chase, 
t blow to-night his bugle horn. Had I 
% power of Merlin, Goddess ! this should be : 
I I all the stars, fast as the clouds were riven, 
■uld sally forth, to keep thee company, 
nying and sparkling through the clear blue 
heaven ; 
:, Cynthia ! should to thee the palm be given, 
sen both for beauty and for majesty. 

Even as a dragon's eye that feels the stress 
Of a bedimming sleep, or as a lamp 
Suddenly glaring through sepulchral damp, 
So burns yon Taper 'mid a black recess 
Of mountains, silent, dreary, motionless : 
The lake below reflects it not ; the sky 
Muffled in clouds, affords no company 
To mitigate and cheer its lonehness. 
Yet, round the body of that joyless Thing 
Which sends so far its melancholy light, 
Perhaps are seated in domestic ring 
A gay society with faces bright, 
Conversing, reading, laughing ; — or they sing, 
While hearts and voices in the song unite. 

The stars are mansions built by Nature's hand, 
And, haply, there the spirits of the blest 
Dwell, clothed in radiance, their immortal vest ; 
Huge Ocean shows, within his yellow strand, 
A habitation marvellously planned, 
For life to occupy in love and rest ; 
All that we see — is dome, or vault, or nest, 
Or fortress, reared at Nature's sage command. 
Glad thought for every season ! but the Spring 
Gave it while cares were weighing on my heart, 
'Mid song of birds, and insects murmuring ; 
And while the youthful year's prolific art — 
Of bud, leaf, blade, and flower — was fashioning 
Abodes where self-disturbance hath no part. 

Desponding Father ! mark this altered bough, 
So beautiful of late, with sunshine warmed, 
Or moist with dews ; what more unsightly now, 
Its blossoms shrivelled, and its fruit, if formed, 
Invisible ? yet Spring her genial brow 
Knits not o'er that discolouring and decay 
As false to expectation. Nor fret thou 
At like unlovely process in the May 
Of human life : a Stripling's graces blow, 
Fade and are shed, that from their timely fall 
(Misdeem it not a cankerous change) may grow 
Rich mellow bearings, that for thanks shall call : 
In all men, sinful is it to be slow 
To hope — in Parents, sinful above all. 

U 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

CAPTIVITY. — MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 
" As the cold aspect of a sunless way 
Strikes through the Traveller's frame with deadlier 
chill, 
Oft as appears a grove, or obvious hill, 
Glistening with unparticipated ray, 
Or shining slope where he must never stray ; 
So joys, remembered without wish or will, 
Sharpen the keenest edge of present ill, — ■ 
On the crushed heart a heavier burthen lay. 
Just Heaven, contract the compass of my mind 
To fit proportion with my altered state ! 
Quench those felicities whose light I find 
Reflected in my bosom all too late ! — 
be my spirit, like my thraldom, strait ; 
And, like mine eyes that stream with sorrow, blind!" 

ST. CATHERINE OF LEDBURY. 
When human touch (as monkish books attest) 
Nor was applied nor could be, Ledbury bells 
Broke forth in concert flung adown the dells, 
And upward, high as Malvern's cloudy crest ; 
Sweet tones, and caught by a noble Lady blest 
To rapture ! Mabel listened at the side 
Of her loved mistress : soon the music died, 
And Catherine said, ^tVC E ct tt}) lUg YCSt. 
Warned in a dream, the Wanderer long had sought 
A home that by such miracle of sound 
Must be revealed : — she heard it now, or felt 
The deep, deep joy of a confiding thought ; 
And there, a saintly Anchoress, she dwelt 
Till she exchanged for heaven that happy ground. 

Though narrow be that old Man's cares, and near, 
The poor old Man is greater than he seems : 
For he hath waking empire, wide as dreams ; 
An ample sovereignty of eye and ear. 
Rich are his walks with supernatural cheer ; 
The region of his inner spirit teems 
With vital sounds and monitory gleams 
Of high astonishment and pleasing fear. 
He the seven birds hath seen, that never part, 
Seen the Seven Whistlers in their nightly rounds, 
And counted them : and oftentimes will start — 
For overhead are sweeping Gabriel's Hounds 
Doomed, with their impious Lord, the flying Hart 
To chase for ever, on aerial grounds ! 

Four fiery steeds impatient of the rein 
Whirled us o'er sunless ground beneath a sky 
As void of sunshine, when, from that wide plain, 
Clear tops of far-off mountains we descry, 
Like a Sierra of cerulean Spain, 
All light and lustre. Did no heart reply ? 
Yes, there was One ; — for One, asunder fly 
The thousand links of that ethereal chain ; 
And green vales open out, with grove and field, 
And the fair front of many a happy Home ; 
Such tempting spots as into vision come 
While Soldiers, weary of the arms they wield 
And sick at heart of strifeful Christendom, 
Gaze on the moon by parting clouds revealed. 

Brook ! whose society the Poet seeks, 
Intent his wasted spirits to renew ; 
And whom the curious Painter doth pursue 
Through rocky passes, among flowery creeks, 
And tracks thee dancing down thy water-breaks ; 
If wish were mine some type of thee to view, 
Thee, and not thee thyself, I would not do 
Like Grecian Artists, give thee human cheeks, 
Channels for tears ; no Naiad should'st thou be,- 
Have neither limbs, feet, feathers, joints nor hairs 
It seems the Eternal Soul is clothed in thee 
With purer robes than those of flesh and blood, 
And hath bestowed on thee a safer good ; 
Unwearied joy, and fife without its cares. 

COMPOSED ON THE BANKS OF A ROCKY STREAM. 
Dogmatic Teachers, of the snow-white fur! 
Ye wrangling Schoolmen, of the scarlet hood ! 
Who, with a keenness not to be withstood, 
Press the point home, or falter and demur, 
Checked in your course by many a teasing burr ; 
These natural council-seats your acrid blood 
Might cool ; — and, as the Genius of the flood 
Stoops willingly to animate and spur 
Each fighter function slumbering in the brain, 
Yon eddying balls of foam, these arrowy gleMBS 
That o'er the pavement of the surging streams 
Welter and flash, a synod might detain 
With subtle speculations, haply vain, 
But surely less so than your far-fetched themes ! 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

XXXIII. 
HIS, AND THE TWO FOLLOWING, WERE SUGGESTED 
BY MR. W. WESTALL'S VIEWS OF THE CAVES, ETC. 
IN YORKSHIRE. 
 ure element of waters ! wheresoe'er 
[hou dost forsake thy subterranean haunts, 
xreen herbs, bright flowers, and berry-bearing 
plants, 
itise into life and in thy train appear : 
\\.ni, through the sunny portion of the year, 
iiwift insects shine, thy hovering pursuivants : 
i^.nd, if thy bounty fail, the forest pants ; 
Lnd hart and hind and hunter with his spear, 
..anguish and droop together. Nor unfelt 
In man's perturbed soul thy sway benign ; 
|Lnd, haply, far within the marble belt 
|)f central earth, where tortured Spirits pine 
'or grace and goodness lost, thy murmurs melt 
'heir anguish, — and they blend sweet songs with 
thine. 

MALHAM COVE. 
^as the aim frustrated by force or guile, 
vhen giants scooped from out the rocky ground, 
jier under tier, this semicirque profound  
Jiants — the same who built hi Erin's isle 
jhat Causeway with incomparable toil !) — 
L had this vast theatric structure wound 
Fith finished sweep into a perfect round, 
jo mightier work had gained the plausive smile 
If all-beholding Phoebus ! But, alas, 
;ain earth ! false world ! Foundations must be laid 
i Heaven ; for, 'mid the wreck of is and was, 
lungs incomplete and purposes betrayed 
ake sadder transits o'er thought's optic glass 
pan noblest objects utterly decayed. 

t early dawn, or rather when the air 
!immers with fading light, and shadowy Eve 
busiest to confer and to bereave ; 
ien, pensive Votary ! let thy feet repair 
) Gordale-chasm, terrific as the lair 
here the young lions couch ; for so, by leave 

: Waters (as Mr. Westall informs us in the letter-press 
;fixed to his admirable views) are invariably found to 
iv through these caverns. 

Of the propitious hour, thou may'st perceive 
The local Deity, with oozy hair 
And mineral crown, beside his jagged urn, 
Recumbent : Him thou may'st behold, who hides 
His lineaments by day, yet there presides, 
Teaching the docile waters how to turn, 
Or (if need be) impediment to spurn, 
And force their passage to the salt-sea tides ! 

COMPOSED UPON WESTMINSTER BRIDGE, SEPT. , i. 
Earth has not any thing to show more fair : 
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by 
A sight so touching in its majesty : 
This City now doth, like a garment, wear 
The beauty of the morning ; silent, bare, 
Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie 
Open unto the fields, and to the sky ; 
All bright and glittering in the smokeless air. 
Never did sun more beautifully steep 
In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill ; 
Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep ! 
The river glideth at his own sweet will : 
Dear God ! the very houses seem asleep ; 
And all that mighty heart is lying still ! 

CONCLUSION. 

If these brief Records, by the Muses' art 
Produced as lonely Nature or the strife 
That animates the scenes of public life 
Inspired, may in thy leisure claim a part ; 
And if these Transcripts of the private heart 
Have gained a sanction from thy falling tears ; 
Then  repent not. But my soul hath fears 
Breathed from eternity ; for as a dart 
Cleaves the blank air, Life flies : now every day 
Is but a glimmering spoke in the swift wheel 
Of the revolving week. Away, away, 
All fitful cares, all transitory zeal ! 
So timely Grace the immortal wing may heal, 
And honour rest upon the senseless clay. 

 This line alludes to Sonnets which will be found in 
another Class. 

— 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

PART III. 

Though the bold wings of Poesy affect 
The clouds, and wheel around the mountain tops 
Rejoicing, from her loftiest height she drops 
Well pleased to skim the plain with wild flowers 
deckt, 
Or muse in solemn grove whose shades protect 
The lingering dew — there steals along, or stops 
Watching the least small bird that round her hops, 
Or creeping worm, with sensitive respect. 
Her functions are they therefore less divine, 
Her thoughts less deep, or void of grave intent 
Her simplest fancies ? Should that fear be thine, 
Aspiring Votary, ere thy hand present 
One offering, kneel before her modest shrine, 
With brow in penitential sorrow bent ! 

OXFORD, MAY , . 
Ye sacred Nurseries of blooming Youth ! 
In whose collegiate shelter England's Flowers 
Expand, enjoying through their vernal hours 
The air of liberty, the light of truth ; 
Much have ye suffered from Time's gnawing tooth : 
Yet, ye spires of Oxford ! domes and towers ! 
Gardens and groves ! your presence overpowers 
The soberness of reason ; till, in sooth, 
Transformed, and rushing on a bold exchange, 
I slight my own beloved Cam, to range 
Where silver Isis leads my stripling feet ; 
Pace the long avenue, or glide adown 
The stream-like windings of that glorious street — 
An eager Novice robed in fluttering gown ! 

OXFORD, MAY , . 
Shame on this faithless heart ! that could allow 
Such transport, though but for a moment's space ; 
Not while — to aid the spirit of the place — 
The crescent moon clove with its glittering prow 
The clouds, or night-bird sang from shady bough ; 
But in plain daylight : — She, too, at my side, 
Who, with her heart's experience satisfied, 
Maintains inviolate its slightest vow ! 
Sweet Fancy ! other gifts must I receive ; 
Proofs of a higher sovereignty I claim ; 
Take from her brow the withering flowers of eve, 
And to that brow life's morning wreath restore : 
Let her be comprehended in the frame 
Of these illusions, or they please no more. 

RECOLLECTION OF THE PORTRAIT OF KING HENRY 
EIGHTH, TRINITY LODGE, CAMBRIDGE. 
The imperial Stature, the colossal stride, 
Are yet before me ; yet do I behold 
The broad full visage, chest of amplest mould, 
The vestments 'broidered with barbaric pride : 
And lo ! a poniard, at the Monarch's side, 
Hangs ready to be grasped in sympathy 
With the keen threatenings of that fulgent eye. 
Below the white-rimmed bonnet, far-descried. 
Who trembles now at thy capricious mood ? 
'Mid those surrounding Worthies, haughty Kh g, 
We rather think, with grateful mind sedate, 
How Providence educeth, from the spring 
Of lawless will, unlooked-for streams of good, 
Which neither force shall check nor time abate ! 

ON THE DEATH OF HIS MAJESTY (GEORGE THE THIRD) 
Ward of the Law ! — dread Shadow of a King ! 
Whose realm had dwindled to one stately room ; 
Whose universe was gloom immersed in gloom, 
Darkness as thick as life o'er life could fling, 
Save haply for some feeble glimmering 
Of Faith and Hope— if thou, by nature's doom, 
Gently hast sunk into the quiet tomb, 
Why should we bend in grief, to sorrow cling, 
When thankfulness were best?— Fresh-flowing tears 
Or, where tears flow not, sigh succeeding sigh, 
Yield to such after-thought the sole reply 
Which justly it can claim. The Nation hears 
In this deep knell, silent for threescore years, 
An unexampled voice of awful memory ! 

JUNE, . 
Fame tells of groves — from England far away — 
 Groves that inspire the Nightingale to trill 
And modulate, with subtle reach of skill 
Elsewhere unmatched, her ever- varying lay ; 
Such bold report I venture to gainsay : 
For I have heard the quire of Richmond biil 
Chanting, with indefatigable bill, 
Strains that recalled to mind a distant day ; 
When, haply under shade of that same wood, 
And scarcely conscious of the dashing oars 
Plied steadily between those willowy shores, 
The sweet-souled Poet of the Seasons stood — 
Listening, and listening long, in rapturous mood, 
Ye heavenly Birds ! to your Progenitors. 

 Wallacliia is the country alluded to. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

A PARSONAGE IN OXFORDSHIRE. 
IvVhere holy ground begins, unhallowed ends, 
Is marked by no distinguishable line ; 
the turf unites, the pathways intertwine ; 
ilnd, wheresoe'er the stealing footstep tends, 
iarden, and that Domain where kindred, friends, 
Lnd neighbours rest together, here confound 
.'heir several features, mingled like the sound 
bf many waters, or as evening blends 
iVith shady night. Soft airs, from shrub and flower, 
Vaft fragrant greetings to each silent grave ; 
md while those lofty poplars gently wave 
'heir tops, between them comes and goes a sky 
( !right as the glimpses of eternity, 
i'o saints accorded in their mortal hour. 

OMPOSED AMONG THE RUINS OF A CASTLE IN NORTH 
WALES. 
Through shattered galleries, 'mid roofless halls, 
iVandering with timid footsteps oft betrayed, 
|he Stranger sighs, nor scruples to upbraid 
fid Time, though he, gentlest among the Thralls 
|f Destiny, upon these wounds hath laid 
lis lenient touches, soft as light that falls, 
irom the wan Moon, upon the towers and walls, 
ight deepening the profoundest sleep of shade, 
'.elic of Kings ! Wreck of forgotten wars, 
| winds abandoned and the prying stars, 
iime loves Thee ! at his call the Seasons twine 
[uxuriant wreaths around thy forehead hoar ; 
! nd, though past pomp no changes can restore, 
soothing recompence, his gift, is thine ! 

TO THE LADY E. B. AND THE HON. MISS P. 
imposed in the Grounds of Plass Newidd, near Llangollen, . 
Stream, to mingle with your favourite Dee, 
long the Vale of Meditation flows ; 
i styled by those fierce Britons, pleased to see 
i Nature's face the expression of repose ; 
p haply there some pious hermit chose 
) live and die, the peace of heaven his aim ; 
whom the wild sequestered region owes, 
t this late day, its sanctifying name. 
lyn Cafaillgaroch, in the Cambrian tongue, 
l ours, the Vale of Friendship, let this spot 
 named ; where, faithful to a low-roofed Cot, 
i Deva's banks, ye have abode so long ; 
sters in love, a love allowed to climb, 
ven on this earth, above the reach of Time ! 

- 

 Glyn Myrvr. 

TO THE TORRENT AT THE DEVIL'S BRIDGE, NORTH 
WALES . 
How art thou named \ In search of what strange land 
From what huge height, descending % Can such force 
Of waters issue from a British source, 
Or hath not Pindus fed thee, where the band 
Of Patriots scoop their freedom out, with hand 
Desperate as thine ? Or come the incessant shocks 
From that young Stream, that smites the throbbing 
rocks 
Of Viamala ? There I seem to stand, 
As in life's morn ; permitted to behold, 
From the dread chasm, woods climbing above woods, 
In pomp that fades not ; everlasting snows ; 
And skies that ne'er relinquish their repose ; 
Such power possess the family of floods 
Over the minds of Poets, young or old ! 

IN THE WOODS OF RYDAL. 
Wild Redbreast ! hadst thou at Jemima's lip 
Pecked, as at mine, thus boldly, Love might say, 
A half-blown rose had tempted thee to sip 
Its glistening dews ; but hallowed is the clay 
Which the Muse warms ; and I, whose head is grey, 
Am not unworthy of thy fellowship ; 
Nor could I let one thought — one motion — slip 
That might thy sylvan confidence betray. 
For are we not all His without whose care 
Vouchsafed no sparrow falleth to the ground  
"Who gives his Angels wings to speed through air, 
And rolls the planets through the blue profound ; 
Then peck or perch, fond Flutterer ! nor forbear 
To trust a Poet in still musings bound. 

When Philoctetes in the Lemnian isle 
Like a Form sculptured on a monument 
Lay couched ; on him or his dread bow unbent 
Some wild Bird oft might settle and beguile 
The rigid features of a transient smile, 
Disperse the tear, or to the sigh give vent, 
Slackening the pains of ruthless banishment 
From his lov'd home, and from heroic toil. 
And trust that spiritual Creatures round us move, 
Griefs to allay which Reason cannot heal ; 
Yea, veriest reptiles have sufficed to prove 
To fettered wretchedness, that no Bastile 
Is deep enough to exclude the light of love, 
Though man for brother man has ceased to feel, 
p  

-I 

i-: 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

While Anna's peers and early playmates tread, 
In freedom, mountain-turf and river's marge ; 
Or float with music in the festal barge ; 
Rein the proud steed, or through the dance are led ; 
Her doom it is to press a weary bed — 
Till oft her guardian Angel, to some charge 
More urgent called, will stretch his wings at large, 
And friends too rarely prop the languid head. 
Yet, helped by Genius — untired comforter, 
The presence even of a stuffed Owl for her 
Can cheat the time ; sending her fancy out 
To ivied castles and to moonlight skies, 
Though he can neither stir a plume, nor shout ; 
Nor veil, with restless film, his staring eyes. 

TO THE CUCKOO. 
Not the whole warbling grove in concert heard 
When sunshine follows shower, the breast can thrill 
Like the first summons, Cuckoo ! of thy bill, 
With its twin notes inseparably paired. 
The captive 'mid damp vaults' unsunned, unaired, 
Measuring the periods of his lonely doom, 
That cry can reach ; and to the sick man's room 
Sends gladness, by no languid smile declared. 
The lordly eagle-race through hostile search 
May perish; time may come when never more 
The wilderness shall hear the lion roar; 
But, long as cock shall crow from household perch 
To rouse the dawn, soft gales shall speed thy wing, 
And thy erratic voice be faithful to the Spring ! 

TO 

[Miss not the occasion : by the foreloclc take 
That subtile Power, the never-halting Time, 
Lest a mere moment's putting-off should make 
Mischance almost as heavy as a crime.] 
" Wait, prithee, wait !" this answer Lesbia threw 
Forth to her Dove, and took no further heed. 
Her eye was busy, while her fingers flew 
Across the harp, with soul engrossing speed ; 
Butfrom that bondage when her thoughts were freed 
She rose, and toward the close-shut casement drew, 
Whence the poor unregarded Favourite, true 
To old affections, had been heard to plead 
With flapping wing for entrance. What a shriek 
Forced from that voice so lately tuned to a strain 
Of harmony ! — a shriek of terror, pain, 
And self-reproach ! for, from aloft, a Kite [beak 
Pounced, — and the Dove, which from its ruthless 
She could not rescue, perished in her sight ! 


THE INFANT M- 

Unquiet Childhood here by special grace 
Forgets her nature, opening like a flower 
That neither feeds nor wastes its vital power 
In painful struggles. Months each other chase, 
And nought untunes that Infant's voice ; no trace ii 
Of fretful temper sullies her pure cheek; 
Prompt, lively, self-sufficing, yet so meek 
That one enrapt with gazing on her face 
(Which even the placid innocence of death 
Could scarcely make more placid, heaven more 
bright) 
Might learn to picture, for the eye of faith, 
The Virgin, as she shone with kindred light; 
A nursling couched upon her mother's knee, 
Beneath some shady palm of Galilee. 

TO , IN HER SEVENTIETH YEAR. 
Such age how beautiful ! Lady bright, 
Whose mortal lineaments seem all refined 
By favouring Nature and a saintly Mind 
To something purer and more exquisite [sight. 
Than flesh and blood ; whene'er thou meet'st n;y 
When I behold thy blanched unwithered cheek, 
Thy temples fringed with locks of gleaming white, 
And head that droops because the soul is meek, 
Thee with the welcome Snowdrop I compare ; 
That child of winter, prompting thoughts that climb 
From desolation toward the genial prime ; 
Or with the Moon conquering earth's mist) air, 
And filling more and more with crystal light 
As pensive Evening deepens into night. 

to rotha q . 
Rotha, my Spiritual Child ! this head was grey 
When at the sacred font for thee I stood ; 
Pledged till thou reach the verge of womanhood, 
And shalt become thy own sufficient stay : 
Too late, I feel, sweet Orphan ! was the day 
For stedfast hope the contract to fulfil ; 
Yet shall my blessing hover o'er thee still, 
Embodied in the music of this Lay, [Stream i 
Breathed forth beside the peaceful mountain 
Whose murmur soothed thy languid Mother's ear 
After her throes, this Stream of name more dear 
Since thou dost bear it, — a memorial theme 
For others ; for thy future self, a spell 
To summon fancies out of Time's dark cell. 

 The river Rotha, that flows into Windermere from the 
Lakes of Grasmere and Rydal. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

GRAVE-STONE UPON THE FLOOR IN THE CLOISTERS 
OF WORCESTER CATHEDRAL, 
Miserrimvs!" and neither name nor date, 
'rayer, text, or symbol, graven upon the stone ; 
fought but that word assigned to the unknown, 
hat solitary word — to separate 
'rom all, and cast a cloud around the fate 
if him who lies beneath. Most wretched one, 
Yho chose his epitaph \ — Himself alone 
ould thus have dared the grave to agitate, 
.nd claim, among the dead, this awful crown ; 
for doubt that He marked also for his own 
lose to these cloistral steps a burial-place, 
'hat every foot might fall with heavier tread, 
rampling upon his vileness. Stranger, pass 
oftly ! — To save the contrite, Jesus bled. 

OMAN ANTIQUITIES DISCOVERED AT BISHOPSTONE, 
HEREFORDSHIRE. 
^hile poring Antiquarians search the ground 
ifpturned with curious pains, the Bard, a Seer, 
Jakes fire : — The men that have been reappear ; 
tomans for travel girt, for business gowned ; 
i.nd some recline on couches, myrtle-crowned, 
a festal glee : why not ? For fresh and clear, 
Is if its hues were of the passing year, 
jiawns this time-buried pavement. From that mound 
l-oards may come forth of Trajans, Maximins, 
ihrunk into coins with all their warlike toil : 
jr a fierce impress issues with its foil 
f tenderness — the Wolf, whose suckling Twins 
he unlettered ploughboy pities when he wins 
he casual treasure from the furrowed soil. 

. 
hatsworth ! thy stately mansion, and the pride 
If thy domain, strange contrast do present 
jo house and home in many a craggy rent 
If the wild Peak ; where new-born waters glide 
through fields whose thrifty occupants abide 
Is in a dear and chosen banishment, 
■'nth every semblance of entire content ; 
;o kind is simple Nature, fairly tried ! 
et He whose heart in childhood gave her troth 
i'o pastoral dales, thin-set with modest farms, 
Jay learn, if judgment strengthen with his growth, 
j'hat, not for Fancy only, pomp hath charms ; 
(aid, strenuous to protect from lawless harms 
'he extremes of favoured life, may honour both. 

A TRADITION OF OKEfi HILL IN DARLEY DALE, 
DERBYSHIRE. 
'Tis said that to the brow of yon fair hill 
Two Brothers clomb, and, turning face from face, 
Nor one look more exchanging, grief to still 
Or feed, each planted on that lofty place 
A chosen Tree ; then, eager to fulfil 
Their courses, like two new-born rivers, they 
In opposite directions urged their way 
Down from the far-seen mount. No blast might kill 
Or blight that fond memorial ; — the trees grew, 
And now entwine their arms ; but ne'er again 
Embraced those Brothers upon earth's wide plain; 
Nor aught of mutual joy or sorrow knew 
Until their spirits mingled in the sea 
That to itself takes all, Eternity. 

FILIAL PIETY. 
(ON THE WAYSIDE BETWEEN PBESTON AND LIVERPOOL.) 
Untouched through all severity of cold ; 
Inviolate, whate'er the cottage hearth 
Might need for comfort, or for festal mirth ; 
That Pile of Turf is half a century old : 
Yes, Traveller ! fifty winters have been told 
Since suddenly the dart of death went forth 
'Gainst him who raised it, — his last work on earth: 
Thence has it, with the Son, so strong a hold 
Upon his Father's memory, that his hands, 
Through reverence, touch it only to repair 
Its waste.— Though crumbling with each breath of air, 
In annual renovation thus it stands — 
Rude Mausoleum ! but wrens nestle there, 
And red-breasts warble when sweet sounds are rare. 

TO THE AUTHOR'S PORTRAIT. 
[Painted at Rydal Mount, by W. Pickefsgill, Esq., for St. John's 
College, Cambridge.] 
Go, faithful Portrait ! and where long hath knelt 
Margaret, the saintly Foundress, take thy place ; 
And, if Time spare the colours for the grace 
Which to the work surpassing skill hath dealt, 
Thou, on thy rock reclined, though kingdoms melt 
And states be torn up by the roots, wilt seem 
To breathe in rural peace, to hear the stream, 
And think and feel as once the Poet felt. 
Whate'er thy fate, those features have not grown 
Unrecognised through many a household tear 
More prompt, more glad, to fall than drops of dew 
By morning shed around a flower half-blown ; 
Tears of delight, that testified how true 
To life thou art, and, in thy truth, how deal- ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Why art thou silent ! Is thy love a plant 
Of such weak fibre that the treacherous air 
Of absence withers what was once so fair ? 
Is there no debt to pay, no boon to grant ? 
Yet have my thoughts for thee been vigilant — 
Bound to thy service with unceasing care, 
The mind's least generous wish a mendicant 
For nought but what thy happiness could spare. 
Speak — though this soft warm heart, once free to 
hold 
A thousand tender pleasures, thine and mine, 
Be left more desolate, more dreary cold 
Than a forsaken bird's-nest filled with snow 
'Mid its own bush of leafless eglantine — 
Speak, that my torturing doubts their end may know ! 

TO B. R. HAYBON, ON SEEING HIS PICTURE OF NAPO- 
LEON BUONAPARTE ON THE ISLANB OF ST. HELENA. 
Haydon ! let worthier judges praise the skill 
Here by thy pencil shown in truth of lines 
And charm of colours ; / applaud those signs 
Of thought, that give the true poetic thrill ; 
That unencumbered whole of blank and still, 
Sky without cloud — ocean without a wave ; 
And the one Man that laboured to enslave 
The World, sole-standing high on the bare hill — 
Back turned, arms folded, the unapparent face 
Tinged, we may fancy, in this dreary place 
With light reflected from the invisible sun 
Set, like his fortunes ; but not set for aye 
Like them. The unguilty Power pursues his way, 
And before Mm doth dawn perpetual run. 

A Poet I — He hath put his heart to school, 
Nor dares to move unpropped upon the staff 
Which Art hath lodged within his hand — must laugh 
By precept only, and shed tears by rule. 
Thy Art be Nature ; the live current quaff, 
And let the groveller sip his stagnant pool, 
In fear that else, when Critics grave and cool 
Have killed him, Scorn should write his epitaph. 
How does the Meadow-flower its bloom unfold ? 
Because the lovely little flower is free 
Down to its root, and, in that freedom, bold ; 
And so the grandeur of the Forest-tree 
Comes not by casting in a formal mould, 
But from its own divine vitality. 

The most alluring clouds that mount the sky 
Owe to a troubled element their forms, 
Their hues to sunset. If with raptured eye 
We watch their splendor, shall we covet storms, 
And wish the Lord of day his slow decline 
Would hasten, that such pomp may float on high! 
Behold, already they forget to shine, 
Dissolve — and leave to him who gazed a sigh. 
Not loth to thank each moment for its boon 
Of pure delight, come whencesoe'er it may, 
Peace let us seek, — to stedfast things attune 
Calm expectations, leaving to the gay 
And volatile their love of transient bowers, 
The house that cannot pass away be ours. 

ON A PORTRAIT OF THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON 
UPON THE FIELD OF WATERLOO, BY HAYDON. 
By Art's bold privilege Warrior and War-horse 
stand 
On ground yet strewn with their last battle's wreck ; 
Let the Steed glory while his Master's hand 
Lies fixed for ages on his conscious neck ; 
But by the Chieftain's look, though at his side 
Hangs that day's treasured sword,how firm a check 
Is given to triumph and all human pride ! 
Yon trophied Mound shrinks to a shadowy speck 
In his calm presence ! Him the mighty deed 
Elates not, brought far nearer the grave's rest, 
As shows that time-worn face, for he such seed 
Has sown as yields, we trust, the fruit of fame 
In Heaven ; hence no one blushes for thy name, 
Conqueror, mid some sad thoughts, divinely blest ! 

COMPOSED ON A MAY MORNING, . 
Life with yon Lambs, like day, is just begun, 
Yet Nature seems to them a heavenly guide. 
Does joy approach % they meet the coming tide; 
And sullenness avoid, as now they shun 
Pale twilight's lingering glooms, — and in the sun 
Couch near their dams, with quiet satisfied ; 
Or gambol — each with his shadow at his side, 
Varying its shape wherever he may run. 
As they from turf yet hoar with sleepy dew 
All turn, and court the shining and the green., 
Where herbs look up, and opening flowers are seen ] 
Why to God's goodness cannot We be true, 
And so, His gifts and promises between, 
Feed to the last on pleasures ever new ? 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

 ! where she stands fixed in a saint-like trance, 
ae upward hand, as if she needed rest 
pom rapture, lying softly on her breast ! 
or wants her eyeball an ethereal glance ; 
it not the less — nay more — that countenance, 
hile thus illumined, tells of painful strife 
)r a sick heart made weary of this life 
f love, long crossed with adverse circumstance. 
•Would She were now as when she hoped to pass 
; God's appointed hour to them who tread 
saven's sapphire pavement, yet breathed well 
content, 
ell pleased, her foot should print earth's common 
grass, 
ved thankful for day's light, for daily bread, 
>r health, and time in obvious duty spent. 

TO A PAINTER. 
ll praise the Likeness by thy skill portrayed; 
it 'tis a fruitless task to paint for me, 
iho, yielding not to changes Time has made, 
\r the habitual light of memory see 
/es unbedimmed, see bloom that cannot fade, 
jid smiles that from their birth-place ne'er shall flee 
;to the land where ghosts and phantoms be ; 
nd, seeing this, own nothing in its stead. 
'•uldst thou go back into far- distant years, 
'• share with me, fond thought ! that inward eye, 
jien, and then only, Painter ! could thy Art 
le visual powers of Nature satisfy, 
jhich hold, whate'er to common sight appears, 
aeir sovereign empire in a faithful heart. 

ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
iough  beheld at first with blank surprise 
lis Work, I now have gazed on it so long 
pee its truth with unreluctant eyes ; 
; my Beloved ! I have done thee wrong, 
l nscious of blessedness, but, whence it sprung, 
frer too heedless, as I now perceive : 
brn into noon did pass, noon into eve, 
id the old day was welcome as the young, 
 welcome, and as beautiful — in sooth 
pre beautiful, as being a thing more holy : 
lanks to thy virtues, to the eternal youth 
! all thy goodness, never melancholy ; 
j> thy large heart and humble mind, that cast 
to one vision, future, present, past. 

Hark ! 'tis the Thrush, undaunted, undeprest, 
By twilight premature of cloud and rain ; 
Nor does that roaring wind deaden his strain 
Who carols thinking of his Love and nest, 
And seems, as more incited, still more blest. 
Thanks ; thou hast snapped a fire-side Prisoner's 
chain, 
Exulting Warbler ! eased a fretted brain, 
And hi a moment charmed my cares to rest. 
Yes, I will forth, bold Bird ! and front the blast, 
That we may sing together, if thou wilt, 
So loud, so clear, my Partner through life's day, 
Mute in her nest love-chosen, if not love-built 
Like thine, shall gladden, as in seasons past, 
Thrilled by loose snatches of the social Lay. 
Rydal Mount, . 

'Tts He whose yester-evening's high disdain 
Beat back the roaring storm — but how subdued 
His day-break note, a sad vicissitude ! 
Does the hour's drowsy weight his glee restrain ? 
Or, like the nightingale, her joyous vein 
Pleased to renounce, does this dear Thrush attune 
His voice to suit the temper of yon Moon 
Doubly depressed, setting, and in her wane ? 
Rise, tardy Sun ! and let the Songster prove 
(The balance trembling between night and morn 
No longer) with what ecstasy upborne 
He can pour forth his spirit. In heaven above, 
And earth below, they best can serve true gladness 
Who meet most feelingly the calls of sadness. 

Oh what a Wreck ! how changed in mien and 
speech ! 
Yet — though dread Powers, that work in mystery, 
spin 
Entanglings of the brain ; though shadows stretch 
O'er the chilled heart — reflect ; far, far within 
Hers is a holy Being, freed from Sin. 
She is not what she seems, a forlorn wretch, 
But delegated Spirits comfort fetch 
To Her from heights that Reason may not win. 
Like Children, She is privileged to hold 
Divine communion ; both do live and move, 
Whate'er to shallow Faith their ways unfold, 
Inly illumined by Heaven's pitying love ; 
Love pitying innocence not long to last, 
In them — in Her our sins and sorrows past. 

 


POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

XXXVII. 
Intent on gathering wool from hedge and brake 
Yon busy Little-ones rejoice that soon 
A poor old Dame will bless them for the boon : 
Great is their glee while flake they add to flake 
With rival earnestness ; far other strife 
Than will hereafter move them, if they make 
Pastime their idol, give their day of life 
To pleasure snatched for reckless pleasure's sake. 
Can pomp and show allay one heart-born grief? 
Pains which the World inflicts can she requite ? 
Not for an interval however brief; 
The silent thoughts that search for stedfast light, 
Love from her depths, and Duty in her might, 
And Faith — these only yield secure relief. 
March th, . 
XXXVIII. 
A PLEA FOR AUTHORS, MAY . 
Faii ing impartial measure to dispense 
To every suitor, Equity is lame ; 
And social Justice, stript of reverence 
For natural rights, a mockery and a shame ; 
Law but a servile dupe of false pretence, 
If, guarding grossest things from common claim 
Now and for ever, She, to works that came 
From mind and spirit, grudge a short-lived fence. 
" What ! lengthened privilege, a lineal tie, 
For Books I " Yes, heartless Ones, or be it proved 
That 'tis a fault in Us to have lived and loved 
Like others, with like temporal hopes to die ; 
No public harm that Genius from her course 
Be turned ; and streams of truth dried up, even at 
their source ! 

VALEDICTORY SONNET. 
Closing the Volume of Sonnets published in SS. 
Serving no haughty Muse, my hands have here 
Disposed some cultured Flowerets (drawn from spots 
Where they bloomed singly, or in scattered knots), 
Each kind in several beds of one parterre ; 
Both to allure the casual Loiterer, 
And that, so placed, my Nurslings may requite 
Studious regard with opportune delight, 
Nor be unthanked, unless I fondly err. 
But metaphor dismissed, and thanks apart, 
Reader, farewell ! My last words let them be — 
If in this book Fancy and Truth agree ; 
If simple Nature trained by careful Art 
Through It have won a passage to thy heart ; 
Grant me thy love, I crave no other fee ! 

TO THE REV. CHRISTOPHER WORDSWORTH, D.D. 
MASTER OF HARROW SCHOOL, 
After the perusal of his Theophilus Ar.glicanus, recently published. 
Enlightened Teacher, gladly from thy hand 
Have I received this proof of pains bestowed 
By Thee to guide thy Pupils on the road 
That, in our native isle, and every land, 
The Church, when trusting in divine command 
And in her Catholic attributes, hath trod : 
may these lessons be with profit scanned 
To thy heart's wish, thy labour blest by God ! 
So the bright faces of the young and gay 
Shall look more bright — the happy, happier still ; 
Catch, in the pauses of their keenest play, 
Motions of thought which elevate the will 
And, like the Spire that from your classic Hill 
Points heavenward, indicate the end and way. 
Rydal Mount, Dec. , . 
XLI. 
TO THE PLANET VENUS. 
Upon its approximation (as an Evening Star) to the Earth, JaD. i. 
What strong allurement draws, what spirit guides, 
Thee, Vesper ! brightening still, as if the nearer 
Thou com'st to man's abode the spot grew dearer 
Night after night ? True is it Nature hides 
Her treasures less and less. — Man now presides 
In power,.where once he trembled in his weakness; 
Science advances with gigantic strides ; 
But are we aught enriched in love and meekness? 
Aught dost thou see, bright Star ! of pure and wise 
More than in humbler times graced human story ; 
That makes our hearts more apt to sympathise 
With heaven, our souls more fit for future gloi'y, 
When earth shall vanish from our closing eyes, 
Ere we lie down in our last dormitory ? 
XLII. 
Wansfell ! this Household has a favoured  jt, 
Living with liberty on thee to gaze, 
To watch while Morn first crowns thee with her rayB, 
Or when along thy breast serenely float 
Evening's angelic clouds. Yet ne'er a note 
Hath sounded (shame upon the Bard !) thy praise 
For all that thou, as if from heaven, hast brought 
Of glory lavished on our quiet days. 
Bountiful Son of Earth ! when we are gone 
From every object dear to mortal sight, 
As soon we shall be, may these words attest 
How oft, to elevate our spirits, shone 
Thy visionary majesties of light, 
How in thy pensive glooms our hearts found rest. 
Dec. , . 

 The Hill that rises to the south-east, above Ambleside. 

MISCELLANEOUS SONNETS. 

 

While beams of orient light shoot wide and high, 
Deep in the vale a little rural Town 
iBreathes forth a cloud-like creature of its own, 
That mounts not toward the radiant morning sky, 
IBut, with a less ambitious sympathy, 
bangs o'er its Parent waking to the cares 
Troubles and toils that every day prepares. 
so Fancy, to the musing Poet's eye, 
(Bndears that Lingerer. And how blest her f way 
jLike influence never may my soul reject) 
If the calm Heaven, now to its zenith decked 
With glorious forms in numberless array, 
To the lone shepherd on the hills disclose 
ileams from a world in which the saints repose. 
Jan , . 

jj my mind's eye a Temple, like a cloud 
"slowly surmounting some invidious hill, 
jftose out of darkness : the bright Work stood still ; 
knd might of its own beauty have been proud, 
ut it was fashioned and to God was vowed 
By Virtues that diffused, in every part, 
Spirit divine through forms of human art : 
Faith had her arch — her arch, when winds blow loud, 
!nto the consciousness of safety thrilled; 
ind Love her towers of dread foundation laid 
Jnder the grave of things ; Hope had her spire 
Star-high, and pointing still to something higher ; 
^rembling I gazed, but heard a voice — it said, 
Hell-gates arepowerless Phantoms when we build." 

ON THE PROJECTED KENDAL AND WINDERMERE 
RAILWAY. 
■s then no nook of English ground secure 
'rom rash assault If Schemes of retirement sown 
n youth, and mid the busy world kept pure 
ls when their earliest flowers of hope were blown, 
lust perish ; — how can they this blight endure ? 
aid must he too the ruthless change bemoan 


 Ambleside. 
t The degree and kind of attachment which many of the 
imanry feel to their small inheritances can scarcely he 
rer-rated. Near the house of one of them stands a mag- 
cent tree, which a neighbour of the owner advised him 
) fell for profit's sake. " Fell it ! " exclaimed the yeoman, 
I had rather fall on my knees and worship it." It happens, 
believe, that the intended railway would pass through 
Pis little property, and I hope that an apology for the 
swer will not be thought necessary by one who enters 
ito the strength of the feeling. 

Who scorns a false utilitarian lure 
Mid his paternal fields at random thrown ? 
Baffle the threat, bright Scene, from Orrest-head 
Given to the pausing traveller's rapturous glance : 
Plead for thy peace, thou beautiful romance 
Of nature ; and, if human hearts be dead, 
Speak, passing winds ; ye torrents, with your strong 
And constant voice, protest against the wrong. 
October th, . 

Proud were ye, Mountains, when, in times of old, 
Your patriot sons, to stem invasive war, 
Intrenched your brows ; ye gloried in each scar : 
Now, for your shame, a Power, the Thirst of Gold, 
That rules o'er Britain like a baneful star, 
Wills that your peace, your beauty, shall be sold, 
And clear way made for her triumphal car 
Through the beloved retreats your arms enfold ! 
Heard ye that Whistle ? As her long-linked Train 
Swept onwards, did the vision cross your view ? 
Yes, ye were startled ; — and, in balance true, 
Weighing the mischief with the promised gain, 
Mountains, and Vales, and Floods, I call on you 
To share the passion of a just disdain. 

AT FURNESS ABBEY. 
Here, where, of havoc tired and rash undoing, 
Man left this Structure to become Time's prey 
A soothing spirit follows in the way 
That Nature takes, her counter-work pursuing. 
See how her Ivy clasps the sacred Ruin 
Fall to prevent or beautify decay ; 
And, on the mouldered waUs, how bright, how gay, 
The flowers in pearly dews their bloom renewing ! 
Thanks to the place, blessings upon the hour ; 
Even as I speak the rising Sun's first smile 
Gleams on the grass-crowned top of yon tall Tower 
Whose cawing occupants with joy proclaim 
Prescriptive title to the shattered pile 
Where, Cavendish, thine seems nothing bu ! a name ! 

AT FURNESS ABBEY. 
Well have yon Railway Labourers to this ground 
Withdrawn for noontide rest. They sit, they walk 
Among the Ruins, but no idle talk 
Is heard ; to grave demeanour all are bound ; 
And from one voice a Hymn with tuneful sound 
Hallows once more the long-deserted Quire 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

And thrills the old sepulchral earth, around. 
Others look up, and with fixed eyes admire 
That wide-spanned arch, wondering how it was 
raised, 
To keep, so high in air, its strength and grace : 

n 

All seem to feel the spirit of the place, 
And by the general reverence God is praised : 
Profane Despoilers, stand ye not reproved, 
While thus these simple-hearted men are moved ! 
June si, . 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 
. 

DEPARTURE 
PROM THE VALE OF GRASMEEE. AUGUST, . 
The gentlest Shade that walked Elysian plains 
Might sometimes covet dissoluble chains ; 
Even for the tenants of the zone that lies 
Beyond the stars, celestial Paradise, 
Methinks 'twould heighten joy, to overleap 
At will the crystal battlements, and peep 
Into some other region, though less fair, 
To see how things are made and managed there. 
Change for the worse might please, incursion bold 
Into the tracts of darkness and of cold ; 
O'er Limbo lake with aery flight to steer, 
And on the verge of Chaos hang in fear. 
Such animation often do I find, 
Power in my breast, wings growing in my mind, 
Then, when some rock or hill is overpast, 
Perchance without one look behind me cast, 
Some barrier with which Nature, from the birth 
Of things, has fenced this fairest spot on earth. 
O pleasant transit, Grasmere ! to resign 
Such happy fields, abodes so calm as thine ; 
Not like an outcast with himself at strife ; . 
The slave of business, time, or care for life, 
But moved by choice ; or, if constrained in part, 
Yet still with Nature's freedom at the heart ; — 
To cull contentment upon wildest shores, 
And luxuries extract from bleakest moors ; 
With prompt embrace all beauty to enfold, 
And having rights in all that we behold. 
— Then why these lingering steps? — A bright 
adieu, 
For a brief absence, proves that love is true ; 
Ne'er can the way be irksome or forlorn 
That winds into itself for sweet return. 

AT THE GRAVE OF BURNS. 
. 
SEVEN TEARS AFTER HIS DEATH. 
I shiver, Spirit fierce and bold, 
At thought of what I now behold : 
As vapours breathed from dungeons cold 
Strike pleasure dead, 
So sadness conies from out the mould 
Where Burns is laid. 
And have I then thy bones so near, 
And thou forbidden to appear ? 
As if it were thyself that 's here 
I shrink with pain ; 
And both my wishes and my fear 
Alike are vain. 
Off weight — nor press on weight ! — away 
Dark thoughts !— they came, but not to stay ; 
With chastened feelings would I pay 
The tribute due 
To him, and aught that hides his clay 
From mortal view. 
Fresh as the flower, whose modest worth 
He sang, his genius ' glinted ' forth, 
Rose like a star that touching earth, 
For so it seems, 
Doth glorify its humble birth 
With matchless beams. 
The piercing eye, the thoughtful brow, 
The struggling heart, where be they now ? — 
Full soon the Aspirant of the plough, 
The prompt, the brave, 
Slept, with the obscurest, in the low 
And silent grave. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

I mourned with thousands, but as one 
;More deeply grieved, for He was gone 
i Whose light I hailed when first it shone, 
And showed my youth 
How Verse may build a princely throne 
On humble truth. 
Alas ! where'er the current tends, 
jRegret pursues and with it blends, — 
"Huge Criffel's hoary top ascends 
By Skiddaw seen, — 
'Neighbours we were, and loving friends 
We might have been ; 
True friends though diversely inclined ; 
But heart with heart and mind with mind., 
Where the main fibres are entwined, 
Through Nature's skill, 
May even by contraries be joined 
More closely still. 
The tear will start, and let it flow ; 
Thou ' poor Inhabitant below,' 
Ai this dread moment — even so — 
Might we together 
Have sate and talked where gowans blow, 
Or on wild heather. 
What treasures would have then been placed 
(Within my reach ; of knowledge graced 
•y fancy what a rich repast ! 
But why go on % — 
)h ! spare to sweep, thou mournful blast, 
His grave grass-grown. 
[here, too, a Son, his joy and pride, 
'Not three weeks past the Stripling died,) 
,-iies gathered to his Father's side, 
Soul-moving sight ! 
f et one to which is not denied 
Some sad delight. 
!?or he is safe, a quiet bed 
lath early found among the dead, 
larboured where none can be misled, 
Wronged, or distrest ; 
^.nd surely here it may be said 
That such are blest. 
^.nd oh for Thee, by pitying grace 
Checked oft-times in a devious race, 
tfay He who halloweth the place 
Where Man is laid 
leceive thy Spirit in the embrace 
For which it prayed ! 

Sighing I turned away ; but ere 
Night fell I heard, or seemed to hear, 
Music that sorrow comes not near, 
A ritual hymn, 
Chaunted in love that casts out fear 
By Seraphim. 

THOUGHTS 

SUGGESTED THE DAT FOLLOWING, ON THE BANKS OF NITH, 
NEAR THE POET'S RESIDENCE. 
Too frail to keep the lofty vow 
That must have followed when his brow 
Was wreathed — " The Vision " tells us how — 
With holly spray, 
He faultered, drifted to and fro, 
And passed away. 
Well might such thoughts, dear Sister, throng 
Our minds when, lingering all too long, 
Over the grave of Burns we hung 
In social grief — 
Indulged as if it were a wrong 
To seek relief. 
But, leaving each unquiet theme 
Where gentlest judgments may misdeem, 
And prompt to welcome every gleam 
Of good and fair, 
Let us beside this limpid Stream 
Breathe hopeful air. 
Enough of sorrow, wreck, and blight ; 
Think rather of those moments bright 
When to the consciousness of right 
His course was true, 
When Wisdom prospered in his sight 
And virtue grew. 
Yes, freely let our hearts expand, 
Freely as in youth's season bland, 
When side by side, his Book in hand, 
We wont to stray, 
Our pleasure varying at command 
Of each sweet Lay. 
How oft inspired must he have trod 
These pathways, yon far-stretching road ! 
There lurks his home ; in that Abode, 
With mirth elate, 
Or in his nobly-pensive mood, 
The Rustic sate. 


 POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Proud thoughts that Image overawes, 

Through twilight shades of good and ill 

Before it humbly let us pause, 

Ye now are panting up life's hill, 

And ask of Nature, from what cause 

And more than common strength and skill 

And by what rules 

Must ye display ; 

She trained her Burns to win applause 

If ye would give the better will 

That shames the Schools. 

Its lawful sway. 

Through busiest street and loneliest glen 

Hath Nature strung your nerves to bear 

Are felt the flashes of his pen ; 

Intemperance with less harm, beware ! 

He rules mid winter snows, and when 

But if the Poet's wit ye share, 

Bees fill their hives ; 

Like him can speed 

Deep hi the general heart of men 

The social hour — of tenfold care 

His power survives. 

There will be need ; 

What need of fields in some far clime 


Where Heroes, Sages, Bards sublime, 

For honest men delight will take 

And all that fetched the flowing rhyme 

To spare your failings for his sake, 

Will flatter you, — and fool and rake 

From genuine springs, 
Shall dwell together till old Time 

Your steps pursue ; 


And of your Father's name will make 

Folds up his wings ? 

A snare for you. 

Sweet Mercy ! to the gates of Heaven 


This Minstrel lead, his sins forgiven ; 

Far from their noisy haunts retire, 

The rueful conflict, the heart riven 

And add your voices to the quire 

With vain endeavour, 

That sanctify the cottage fire 

And memory of Earth's bitter leaven, 

With service meet ; 

Effaced for ever. 

There seek the genius of your Sire, 


His spirit greet ; 

But why to Him confine the prayer, 


When kindred thoughts and yearnings bear 

Or where, 'mid ' lonely heights and hows,' 

On the frail heart the purest share 

He paid to Nature tuneful vows ; 

With all that five ?— 

Or wiped his honourable brows 

The best of what we do and are, 

Bedewed with toil, 

Just God, forgive ! 

While reapers strove, or busy plouglis 


Upturned the soil ; 


His judgment with benignant ray 

IV. 

Shall guide, his fancy cheer, your way ; 


But ne'er to a seductive lay 

TO THE SONS OF BURNS, 

Let faith be given ; 

AFTER VISITING THE GRAVE OF THEIE FATHER. 

Nor deem that ' light which leads astray, 

' The Poet's grave is in a corner of the churchyard. We 

Is light from Heaven.' 

• looked at it with melancholy and painful reflections, 


 repeating to each other his own verses — 



Let no mean hope your souls enslave ; 

♦ ' Is there a man whose judgment clear,' &c.' 

Extract from the Journal of my Felbw-traveller. 

Be independent, generous, brave ; 

'Mid crowded obelisks and urns 

Your Father such example gave, 
And such revere ; 
But be admonished by his grave, 

I sought the untimely grave of Burns ; 
Sons of the Bard, my heart still mourns 


And think, and fear ! 

With sorrow true ; 


And more would grieve, but that it turns 


Trembling to you ! 



 See note. 


!• 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

ELLEN IRWIN : 
OB, 
THE BRAES OF KIRTLE. 
Fair Ellen Irwin, when she sate 
Upon the braes of Kirtle, 
Was lovely as a Grecian maid 
Adorned with wreaths of myrtle ; 
^oung Adam Bruce beside her lay, 
And there did they beguile the day 
With love and gentle speeches, 
[Beneath the budding beeches. 
From many knights and many squires 
The Bruce had been selected ; 
ind Gordon, fairest of them all, 
By Ellen was rejected. 
ad tidings to that noble Youth ! 
jFor it may be proclaimed with truth, 
iff Bruce hath loved sincerely, 
That Gordon loves as dearly. 
'But what are Gordon's form and face, 
IHis shattered hopes and crosses, 
To them, 'mid Kirtle's pleasant braes, 
Reclined on flowers and mosses? 
I 
jAlas that ever he was born ! 
The Gordon, couched behind a thorn, 
ees them and their caressing ; 
(Beholds them blest and blessing. 

roud Gordon, maddened by the thoughts 
That through his brain are travelling, 
Rushed forth, and at the heart of Bruce 
He launched a deadly javelin ! 
[Fair Ellen saw it as it came, 
And, starting up to meet the same, 
Did with her body cover 
The Youth, her chosen lover. 
^And, falling into Bruce's arms, . 
Thus died the beauteous Ellen, 
rhus, from the heart of her True-love, 
jUie mortal spear repelling. 
And Bruce, as soon as he had slain 
( Fhe Gordon, sailed away to Spain ; 
And fought with rage incessant 
Against the Moorish crescent. 

The Kirtle is a river in the southern part of Scotland, 
'the banks of which the events here related took place. 

But many days, and many months, 
And many years ensuing, 
This wretched Knight did vainly seek 
The death that he was wooing. 
So, coming his last help to crave, 
Heart-broken, upon Ellen's grave 
His body he extended, 
And there his sorrow ended. 
Now ye, who willingly have heard 
The tale I have been telling, 
May in Kirkonnel churchyard view 
The grave of lovely Ellen : 
By Ellen's side the Bruce is laid ; 
And, for the stone upon his head, 
May no rude hand deface it, 
And its forlorn ^ic jxtet ! 

TO A HIGHLAND GIRL. 
(AT INVEKSNEl'DE, UPON LOCH LOMOND.) 
Sweet Highland Girl, a very shower 
Of beauty is thy earthly dower ! 
Twice seven consenting years have shed 
Their utmost bounty on thy head : 
And these grey rocks ; that household lawn ; 
Those trees, a veil just half withdrawn ; 
This fall of water that doth make 
A murmur near the silent lake ; 
This little bay ; a quiet road 
That holds in shelter thy Abode — ■ 
In truth together do ye seem 
Like something fashioned in a dream ; 
Such Forms as from their covert peep 
When earthly cares are laid asleep ! 
But, fair Creature ! in the light 
Of common day, so heavenly bright, 
I bless Thee, Vision as thou art, 
I bless thee with a human heart ; 
God shield thee to thy latest years ! 
Thee, neither know I, nor thy peers ; 
And yet my eyes are filled with tears. 
With earnest feeling I shall pray 
For thee when I am far away : 
For never saw I mien, or face, 
In which more plainly I could trace 
Benignity and home-bred sense 
Ripening in perfect innocence. 
Here scattered, like a random seed, 
Remote from men, Thou dost not need 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

The embarrassed look of shy distress, 
And maidenly shamefacedness : 
Thou wear'st upon thy forehead cloai 
The freedom of a Mountaineer : 
A face with gladness overspread ! 
Soft smiles, by human kindness bred ! 
And seemliness complete, that sways 
Thy courtesies, about thee plays ; 
With no restraint, but such as springs 
From quick and eager visitings 
Of thoughts that lie beyond the reach 
Of thy few words of English speech : 
A bondage sweetly brooked, a strife 
That gives thy gestures grace and life ! 
So have I, not unmoved in mind, 
Seen birds of tempest-loving kind — 
Thus beating up against the wind. 
What hand but would a garland cull 
For thee who art so beautiful ? 
happy pleasure ! here to dwell 
Beside thee in some heathy dell ; 
Adopt your homely ways, and dress, 
A Shepherd, thou a Shepherdess ! 
But I could frame a wish for thee 
More like a grave reality : 
Thou art to me but as a wave 
Of the wild sea ; and I would have 
Some claim upon thee, if I could, 
Though but of common neighbourhood. 
What joy to hear thee, and to see ! 
Thy elder Brother I would be, 
Thy Father — anything to thee ! 
Now thanks to Heaven ! that of its grace 
Hath led me to this lonely place. 
Joy have I had ; and going hence 
 bear away my recompence. 
In spots like these it is we prize 
Our Memory, feel that she hath eyes : 
Then, why should I be loth to stir I 
I feel this place was made for her ; 
To give new pleasure like the past, 
Continued long as life shall last. 
Nor am I loth, though pleased at heart, 
Sweet Highland Girl ! from thee to part : 
For I, methinks, till I grow old, 
As fair before me shall behold, 
As I do now, the cabin small, 
The lake, the bay, the waterfall ; 
And Thee, the Spirit of them all ! 

VII. 
GLEN-ALMAIN ; 
OB, 
THE NARROW GLEN. 
In this still place, remote from men, 
Sleeps Ossian, in the narrow glen ; 
In this still place, where murmurs on 
But one meek streamlet, only one : 
He sang of battles, and the breath 
Of stormy war, and violent death ; 
And should, methinks, when all was past, 
Have rightfully been laid at last 
Where rocks were rudely heaped, and rent 
As by a spirit turbulent ; 
Where sights were rough, and sounds were wild, 
And everything unreconciled; 
In some complaining, dim retreat, 
For fear and melancholy meet ; 
But this is calm ; there cannot be 
A more entire tranquillity. 
Does then the Bard sleep here indeed ? 
Or is it but a groundless creed ? 
What matters it ? — I blame them not 
Whose Fancy in this lonely Spot 
Was moved ; and in such way expressed 
Their notion of its perfect rest. 
A convent, even a hermit's cell, 
Would break the silence of this Dell : 
It is not quiet, is not ease ; 
But something deeper far than these : 
The separation that is here 
Is of the grave ; and of austere 
Yet happy feelings of the dead : 
And, therefore, was it rightly said 
That Ossian, last of all his race ! 
Lies buried in this lonely place. 

STEPPING WESTWARD. 
While my Fellow-traveller and I were walking by tbesi'l 
of Loch Ketterine, one fine evening after sunset in 
road to a Hut where, in the course of our Tour, we 
been hospitably entertained some weeks before, we Bii 
in one of the loneliest parts of that solitary region, tw 
well-dressed Women, one of whom said tous,byw^i 
of greeting, "What, you are stepping westward Pj 
" Wha t, you are stepping westward ?" — " Yea." 
— 'Twould be a wildisli destiny, 
If we, who thus together roam 
In a strange Land, and far from home, 


MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

Were in this place the guests of Chance : 
• Yet who would stop, or fear to advance, 
Though home or shelter he had none, 
With such a sky to lead him on ? 
The dewy ground was dark and cold ; 
Behind, all gloomy to hehold ; 
And stepping westward seemed to be 
A kind of heavenly destiny : 
  liked the greeting ; 'twas a sound 
: Of something without place or bound ; 
And seemed to give me spiritual right 
To travel through that region bright. 
The voice was soft, and she who spake 
Was walking by her native lake : 
The salutation had to me 
The very sound of courtesy : 
Its power was felt; and while my eye 
Was fixed upon the glowing Sky, 
The echo of the voice enwrought 
I A human sweetness with the thought 
Of travelling through the world that lay 
Before me in my endless way. 

THE SOLITARY REAPER. 
Behold her, single in the field, 
Yon solitary Highland Lass ! 
Reaping and singing by herself ; 
Stop here, or gently pass ! 
Alone she cuts and binds the grain, 
And sings a melancholy strain ; 
listen ! for the Vale profound 
Is overflowing with the sound. 
No Nightingale did ever chaunt 
More welcome notes to weary bands 
Of travellers in some shady haunt, 
Among Arabian sands : 
A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard 
i In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird, 
'Breaking the silence of the seas 
Among the farthest Hebrides. 
Will no one tell me what she sings ? — 
Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow 
For old, unhappy, far-off things, 
And battles long ago : 
Or is it some more humble lay, 
Familiar matter of to-day ? 
Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain, 
That has been, and may be again  

Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang 
As if her song could have no ending ; 
I saw her singing at her work, 
And o'er the sickle bending ; — 
I listened, motionless and still ; 
And, as I mounted up the hill, 
The music in my heart I bore, 
Long after it was heard no more. 

ADDRESS 

KILCHURN CASTLE, UPON LOCH AWE. 
'From the top of the hill a most impressive scene opened 
' upon our view, — a ruined Castle on an Island (for an 
'Island the flood had made it) at some distance from the 
'shore, hacked by a Cove of the Mountain Cruachan, 
' down which came a foaming stream. The Castle 
' occupied every foot of the Island that was visible to us, 
' appearing to rise out of the water, — mists rested upon 
' the mountain side, with spots of sunshine; there was a 
' mild desolation in the low grounds, a solemn grandeur 
' in the mountains, and the Castle was wild, yet stately — 
'not dismantled of turrets — nor the walls broken down, 
' though obviously a ruin.' — Extract from the Journal of 
my Companion. 
Child of loud-throated War ! the mountain Stream 
Roars in thy hearing ; but thy hour of rest 
Is come, and thou art silent in thy age ; 
Save when the wind sweeps by and sounds are caught 
Ambiguous, neither wholly thine nor theirs. 
Oh ! there is life thatbreathesnot ; Powers there are 
That touch each other to the quick in modes 
Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive, 
No soul to dream of. What art Thou, from care 
Cast off — abandoned by thy rugged Sire, 
Nor by soft Peace adopted ; though, in place 
And in dimension, such that thou might'st seem 
But a mere footstool to yon sovereign Lord, 
Huge Cruachan, (a thing that meaner hills 
Might crush, nor know that it had suffered harm ;) 
Yet he, not loth, in favour of thy claims 
To reverence, suspends his own ; submitting 
All that the God of Nature hath conferred, 
All that he holds in common with the stars, 
To the memorial majesty of Time 
Impersonated in thy calm decay ! 
Take, then, thy seat, Vicegerent unreproved ! 
Now, while a farewell gleam of evening light 
Is fondly lingering on thy shattered front, 
Do thou, in turn, be paramount ; and rule 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Over the pomp and beauty of a scene 
Whose mountains, torrents, lake, and woods, unite 
To pay thee homage ; and with these are joined, 
In willing admiration and respect, 
Two Hearts, which in thy presence might be called 
Youthful as Spring. — Shade of departed Power, 
Skeleton of unfleshed humanity. 
The chronicle were welcome that should call 
Into the compass of distinct regard 
The toils and struggles of thy infant years ! 
Yon foaming flood seems motionless as ice ; 
Its dizzy turbulence eludes the eye, 
Frozen by distance ; so, majestic Pile, 
To the perception of this Age, appear 
Thy fierce beginnings, softened and subdued 
And quieted in character — the strife, 
The pride, the fury uncontrollable, 
Lost on the aerial heights of the Crusades ! 

ROB ROY'S GRAVE. 

The history of Rob Roy is sufficiently known ; his grave 
is near the head of Loch Ketterine, in one of those small 
pinfold-like Burial-grounds, of neglected and desolate 
appearance, which the traveller meets with in the High- 
lands of Scotland. 
A famous man is Robin Hood, 
The English ballad-singer's joy ! 
And Scotland has a thief as good, 
An outlaw of as daring mood ; 
She has her brave Rob Roy ! 
Then clear the weeds from off his Grave, 
And let us chant a passing stave, 
In honour of that Hero brave ! 
Heaven gave Rob Roy a dauntless heart 
And wondrous length and strength of arm : 
Nor craved he more to quell his foes, 
Or keep his friends from harm. 
Yet was Rob Roy as wise as brave ; 
Forgive me if the phrase be strong ; — 
A Poet worthy of Rob Roy 
Must scorn a timid song. 
Say, then, that he was wise as brave ; 
As wise in thought as bold in deed : 
For in the principles of things 
He sousrht his moral creed. 

 The tradition is, that the Castle was built by a Lady 
during the absence of her Lord in Palestine. 

Said generous Rob, " What need of books ! 
Burn all the statutes and their shelves : 
They stir us up against our kind ; 
And worse, against ourselves. 
We have a passion — make a law, 
Too false to guide us or control ! 
And for the law itself we fight 
In bitterness of soul. 
And, puzzled, blinded thus, we lose 
Distinctions that are plain and few : 
These find I graven on my heart: 
That tells me what to do. 
The creatures see of flood and field, 
And those that travel on the wind ! 
With them no strife can last ; they live 
In peace, and peace of mind. 
For why ? — because the good old rule 
Sufficeth them, the simple plan, 
That they should take, who have the power, 
And they should keep who can. 
A lesson that is quickly learned, 
A signal this which all can see ! 
Thus nothing here provokes the strong 
To wanton cruelty. 

All freakishness of mind is checked ; 
He tamed, who foolishly aspires ; 
While to the measure of his might 
Each fashions his desires. 
All kinds, and creatures, stand and fall 
By strength of prowess or of wit : 
'Tis God's appointment who must sway, 
And who is to submit. 
Since, then, the rule of right is plain, 
And longest life is but a day ; 
To have my ends, maintain my rights, 
I ' take the shortest way." 
And thus among these rocks he lived, 
Through summer heat and winter snow : 
The Eagle, he was lord above, 
And Rob was lord below. 
So was it — would, at least, have been 
But through untowardness of fate ; 
For Polity was then too strong — 
He came an age too late ; 

: 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

Or shall we say an age too soon ? 
For, were the bold Man living now, 
How might he flourish in Ms pride, 
With buds on every bough ! 
Then rents and factors, rights of chase, 
Sheriffs, and lairds and their domains, 
Would all have seemed but paltry things, 
Not worth a moment's pains. 
Rob Roy had never lingered here, 
To these few meagre Vales confined ; 
But thought how wide the world, the times 
How fairly to his mind ! 
And to his Sword he would have said, 
" Do Thou my sovereign will enact 
From land to land through half the earth ! 
Judge thou of law and fact ! 
'Tis fit that we should do our part, 
Becoming, that mankind should learn 
| That we are not to be surpassed 
In fatherly concern. 
I Of old things all are over old, 
■ Of good things none are good enough : — 
i We ' shew that we can help to frame 
A world of other stuff. 
I, too, will have my kings that take 
(From me the sign of life and death : 
: Kingdoms shall shift about, like clouds, 
Obedient to my breath." 
; And, if the word had been fulfilled, 
i As might have been, then, thought of joy ! 
France would have had her present Boast, 
And we our own Rob Roy ! 
Oh ! say not so ; compare them not ; 
II would not wrong thee, Champion brave ! 
.Would wrong thee nowhere ; least of all 
Here standing by thy grave. 
For Thou, although with some wild thoughts, 
Wild Chieftain of a savage Clan ! 
Hadst this to boast of ; thou didst love 
The liberty of man. 
And, had it been thy lot to live 
With us who now behold the light, 
Thou would'st have nobly stirred thyself, 
And battled for the Right. 

For thou wert still the poor man's stay, 
The poor man's heart, the poor' man's hand ; 
And all the oppressed, who wanted strength, 
Had thine at their command. 
Bear witness many a pensive sigh 
Of thoughtful Herdsman when he strays 
Alone upon Loch Vool's heights, 
And by Loch Lomond's braes ! 
And, far and near, through vale and hill, 
Are faces that attest the same ; 
The proud heart flashing through the eyes, 
At sound of Rob Roy's name. 

SONNET. 

COMPOSED AT CASTLE. 
Degenerate Douglas ! oh, the unworthy Lord ! 
Whom mere despite of heart could so far please, 
And love of havoc, (for with such disease 
Fame taxes him,) that he could send forth word 
To level with the dust a noble horde, 
A brotherhood of venerable Trees, 
Leaving an ancient dome, and towers like these, 
Beggared and outraged ! — Many hearts deplored 
The fate of those old Trees ; and oft with pain 
The traveller, at this day, will stop and gaze 
On wrongs, which Nature scarcely seems to heed : 
For sheltered places, bosoms, nooks, and bays, 
And the pure mountains, and the gentle Tweed, 
And the green silent pastures, yet remain. 

YARROW UNVISITED. 
(See the various Poems the scene of which is laid upon the 
banks of the Yarrow ; in particular, the exquisite Ballad 
of Hamilton beginning 
 Busk ye, busk ye, my bonny, bonny Bride, 
Busk ye, busk ye, my winsome Marrow ! ' — ) 
From Stirling castle we had seen 
The mazy Forth unravelled ; 
Had trod the banks of Clyde, and Tay, 
And with the Tweed had travelled ; 
And when we came to Clovenford, 
Then said my ' ivinsome Marrow] 
" Whate'er betide, we ' turn aside, 
And see the Braes of Yarrow." 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

u Let Yarrow folk, frae Selkirk town, 
Who have been buying, selling, 
Go back to Yarrow, 'tis their own ; 
Each maiden to her dwelling ! 
On Yarrow's banks let herons feed, 
Hares couch, and rabbits burrow ! 
But we will downward with the Tweed, 
Nor turn aside to Yarrow. 
There's Galla Water, Leader Haughs, 
Both lying right before us ; 
And Dryborough, where with chiming Tweed 
The lintwhites sing in chorus ; 
There 's pleasant Tiviot-dale, a land 
Made blithe with plough and harrow : 
Why throw away a needful day 
To go in search of Yarrow ? 
What 's Yarrow but a river bare, 
That glides the dark hills under ? 
There are a thousand such elsewhere 
As worthy of your wonder." 
— Strange words they seemed of slight and scorn ; 
My True-love sighed for sorrow ; 
And looked me in the face, to think 
I thus could speak of Yarrow ! 
"Oh ! green," said I, "are Yarrow's holms, 
And sweet is Yarrow flowing ! 
Fair hangs the apple frae the rock, 
But we will leave it growing. 
O'er hilly path, and open Strath, 
We ' wander Scotland thorough ; 
But, though so near, we will not turn 
Into the dale of Yarrow. 
Let beeves and home-bred kine partake 
The sweets of Burn-mill meadow ; 
The swan on still St. Mary's Lake 
Float double, swan and shadow ! 
We will not see them ; will not go, 
To-day, nor yet to-morrow ; 
Enough if in our hearts we know 
There 's such a place as Yarrow. 
Be Yarrow stream unseen, unknown ! 
It must, or we shall rue it : 
We have a vision of our own ; 
Ah ! why should we mido it ? 
The treasured dreams of times long past, 
We ' keep them, winsome Marrow ! 
For when we 're there, although 'tis fair, 
'Twill be another Yarrow ! 

 See Hamilton's Ballad as above. 

If Care with freezing years should come, 
And wandering seem but folly, — 
Should we be loth to stir from home, 
And yet be melancholy ; 
Should life be dull, and spirits low, 
'Twill soothe us in our sorrow, 
That earth has something yet to show, 
The bonny holms of Yarrow ! " 

SONNET 
IN THE PASS OF KILLICRANKY, 
An invasion being expected, October . 
Six thousand veterans practised in war's game, 
Tried men, at Kilhcranky were arrayed 
Against an equal host that wore the plaid, 
Shepherds and herdsmen. — Like a whirlwind camp 
The Highlanders, the slaughter spread like flame ; 
And Garry, thundering down his mountain-road, 
Was stopped, and could not breathe beneath the load 
Of the dead bodies. — 'Twas a day of shame 
For them whom precept and the pedantry 
Of cold mechanic battle do enslave. 
for a single hour of that Dundee, 
Who on that day the word of onset gave ! 
Like conquest would the Men of England see; 
And her Foes find a like inglorious grave. 

THE MATRON OF JEDBOROUGH AND HER 
HUSBAND. 
At Jedborough, my companion and I went into print 
lodgings for a few days ; and the following Verses wort 
called forth by the character and domestic situation ol 
our Hostess. 
Age ! twine thy brows with fresh spring flowws 
And call a train of laughing Hours ; 
And bid them dance, and bid them sing ; 
And thou, too, mingle in the ring ! 
Take to thy heart a new delight; 
If not, make merry in despite 
That there is One who scorns thy power : — 
But dance ! for under Jedborough Towei , 
A Matron dwells who, though she bears 
The weight of more than seventy years, 
Lives in the light of youthful glee, 
And she will dance and sing with thee. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

Nay ! start not at that Figure — there ! 
Him who is rooted to his chair ! 
Look at him — look again ! for he 
Hath long been of thy family. 
With legs that move not, if they can, 
And useless arms, a trunk of man, 
He sits, and with a vacant eye ; 
A sight to make a stranger sigh ! 
Deaf, drooping, that is now his doom : 
His world is in this single room : 
Is this a place for mirthful cheer ? 
Can merry-making enter here ? 
The joyous Woman is the Mate 
Of him in that forlorn estate ! 
He breathes a subterraneous damp ; 
But bright as Vesper shines her lamp : 
He is as mute as Jedborough Tower : 
She jocund as it was of yore, 
With all its bravery on ; in times 
When all alive with merry chimes, 
Upon a sun-bright morn of May, 
It roused the Vale to holiday. 
I praise thee, Matron ! and thy due 
Is praise, heroic praise, and true ! 
With admiration I behold 
Thy gladness unsubdued and bold : 
I ; Thy looks, thy gestures, all present 
The picture of a life well spent : 
This do I see; and something more; 
A strength unthought of heretofore ! 
Delighted am I for thy sake ; 
And yet a higher joy partake : 
Our Human-nature throws away 
Its second twilight, and looks gay ; 
A land of promise and of pride 
Unfolding, wide as life is wide. 

Ah ! see her helpless Charge ! enclosed 
Within himself as seems, composed ; 
To fear of loss, and hope of gain, 
The strife of happiness and pain, 
Utterly dead ! yet in the guise 
Of little infants, when their eyes 
Begin to follow to and fro 
The persons that before them go, 
He tracks her motions, quick or slow. 
\ Her buoyant spirit can prevail 
Where common cheerfulness would fail ; 
She strikes upon him with the heat 
Of July suns ; he feels it sweet; 
An animal delight though dim ! 
'Tis all that now remains for him ! 

The more I looked, I wondered more — 
And, while I scanned them o'er and o'er, 
Some inward trouble suddenly 
Broke from the Matron's strong black eye- 
A remnant of uneasy light, 
A flash of something over-bright ! 
Nor long this mystery did detain 
My thoughts; — she told in pensive strain 
That she had borne a heavy yoke, 
Been stricken by a twofold stroke ; 
 health of body ; and had pined 
Beneath worse ailments of the mind. 
So be it ! — but let praise ascend 
To Him who is our lord and friend ! 
Who from disease and suffering 
Hath called for thee a second spring ; 
Repaid thee for that sore distress 
By no untimely joyousness ; 
Which makes of thine a blissful state ; 
And cheers thy melancholy Mate ! 

Fly, some kind Harbinger, to Grasmere-dale ! 
Say that we come, and come by this day's light : 
Fly upon swiftest wing round field and height, 
But chiefly let one Cottage hear the tale ; 
There let a mystery of joy prevail, 
The kitten frolic, like a gamesome sprite, 
And Rover whine, as at a second sight 
Of near-approaching good that shall not fail : 
And from that Infant's face let joy appear ; 
Yea, let our Mary's one companion child — 
That hath her six weeks' solitude beguiled 
With intimations manifold and dear, 
While we have wandered over wood and wild — 
Smile on his Mother now with bolder cheer. 

THE BLIND HIGHLAND BOY. 
A TALE TOLD BY THE FIBE-SIDE. AFTER RETURNING TO 
THE VALE OF GRASMERE. 
Now we are tired of boisterous joy, 
Have romped enough, my little Boy ! 
Jane hangs her head upon my breast, 
And you shall bring your stool ac-d rest ; 
This corner is your own. 
Q  

- 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

There ! take your seat, and let me see 
That you can listen quietly : 
And, as I promised, I will tell 
That strange adventure which befel 
A poor blind Highland Boy. 
A Highland Boy ! — why call him so \ 
Because, my Darlings, ye must know 
That, under hills which rise like towers, 
Far higher hills than these of ours ! 
He from his birth had lived. 
He ne'er had seen one earthly sight 
The sun, the day ; the stars, the night ; 
Or tree, or butterfly, or flower, 
Or fish in stream, or bird in bower, 
Or woman, man, or child. 
And yet he neither drooped nor pined, 
Nor had a melancholy mind ; 
For God took pity on the Boy, 
And was his friend ; and gave him joy 
Of which we nothing know. 
His Mother, too, no doubt, above 
Her other children him did love : 
For, was she here, or was she there, 
She thought of him with constant care, 
And more than mother's love. 
And proud she was of heart, when clad 
In crimson stocldngs, tartan plaid, 
And bonnet with a feather gay, 
To Kirk he on the sabbath day 
Went hand in hand with her. 
A dog too, had he ; not for need, 
But one to play with and to feed ; 
Which would have led him, if bereft 
Of company or friends, and left 
Without a better guide. 
And then the bagpipes he could blow — 
And thus from house to house would go 
And all were pleased to hear and see, 
For none made sweeter melody 
Than did the poor blind Boy. 
Yet he had many a restless dream ; 
Both when he heard the eagles scream, 
And when he heard the torrents roar, 
And heard the water beat the shore 
Near which their cottage stood. 

Beside a lake their cottage stood, 
Not small like ours, a peaceful flood ; 
But one of mighty size, and strange ; 
That, rough or smooth, is full of change, 
And stirring in its bed. 
For to this lake, by night and day, 
The great Sea-water finds its way 
Through long, long windings of the lulls 
And drinks up all the pretty rills 
And rivers large and strong : 
Then hurries back the road it came — 
Returns, on errand still the same ; 
This did it when the earth was new ; 
And this for evermore will do, 
As long as earth shall last. 
And, with the coming of the tide, 
Come boats and ships that safely ride 
Between the woods and lofty rocks ; 
And to the shepherds with their flocks 
Bring tales of distant lands. 
And of those tales, whate'er they were, 
The blind Boy always had his share ; 
Whether of mighty towns, or vales 
With warmer suns and softer gales, 
Or wonders of the Deep. 
Yet more it pleased him, more it stirred, 
When from the water-side he heard 
The shouting, and the jolly cheers ; 
The bustle of the mariners 
In stillness or in storm. 
But what do his desires avail ? 
For He must never handle sail ; 
Nor mount the mast, nor row, nor float 
In sailor's ship, or fisher's boat, 
Upon the rocking waves. 
His Mother often thought, and said, 
What sin would be upon her head 
If she should suffer this : " My Son, 
Whate'er you do, leave this undone ; 
The danger is so great." 
Thus lived he by Loch-Leven's side 
Still sounding with the sounding tide, 
And heard the billows leap and dance, 
Without a shadow of mischance, 
Till he was ten years old. 


MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

When one day (and now mark me well, 
Ye soon shall know how this befel) 
He in a vessel of his own, 
On the swift flood is hurrying down, 
Down to the mighty Sea. 
In such a vessel never more 
May human creature leave the shore ! 
If this or that way he should stir, 
Woe to the poor blind Mariner ! 
For death will be his doom. 
But say what bears him ? — Ye have seen 
The Indian's bow, his arrows keen, 
Rare beasts, and birds with plumage bright ; 
Gifts which, for wonder or delight, 
Are brought in ships from far. 
Such gifts had those seafaring men 
Spread round that haven in the glen ; 
Each hut, perchance, might have its own ; 
And to the Boy they all were known — 
He knew and prized them all. 
The rarest was a Turtle-shell 
Which he, poor Child, had studied well ; 
A shell of ample size, and light 
As the pearly car of Amphitrite, 
That sportive dolphins drew. 
And, as a Coracle that braves 
On Vaga's breast the fretful waves, 
This shell upon the deep would swim, 
And gaily lift its fearless brim 
Above the tossing surge. 
And this the little blind Boy knew : 
And he a story strange yet true 
Had heard, how in a shell like this 
An English Boy, thought of bliss ! 
Had stoutly launched from shore ; 
Launched from the margin of a bay 
Among the Indian isles, where lay 
His father's ship, and had sailed far — 
To join that gallant ship of war, 
In his delightful shell. 
Our Highland Boy oft visited 
The house that held this prize ; and, led 
By choice or chance, did thither come 
One day when no one was at home, 
And found the door unbarred. 

While there he sate, alone and blind, 
That story flashed upon his mind ; — 
A bold thought roused him, and he took 
The shell from out its secret nook, 
And bore it on his head. 
He launched his vessel, — and in pride 
Of spirit, from Loch Leven's side, 
Stepped into it — his thoughts all free 
As the light breezes that with glee 
Sang through the adventurer's hair. 
A while he stood upon his feet ; 
He felt the motion — took his seat ; 
Still better pleased as more and more 
The tide retreated from the shore, 
And sucked, and sucked him in. 
And there he is in face of Heaven. 
How rapidly the Child is driven ! 
The fourth part of a mile, I ween, 
He thus had gone, ere he was seen 
By any human eye. 
But when he was first seen, oh me 
What shrieking and what misery ! 
For many saw ; among the rest 
His Mother, she who loved him best, 
She saw her poor blind Boy. 
But for the child, the sightless Boy, 
It is the triumph of his joy ! 
The bravest traveller in balloon, 
Mounting as if to reach the moon, 
Was never half so blessed. 
And let him, let him go his way, 
Alone, and innocent, and gay ! 
For, if good Angels love to wait 
On the forlorn unfortunate, 
This Child will take no harm. 
But now the passionate lament, 
Which from the crowd on shore was sent, 
The cries which broke from old and young 
In Gaelic, or the English tongue, 
Are stifled — all is still. 
And quickly with a silent crew 
A boat is ready to pursue ; 
And from the shore their course they take, 
And swiftly down the running lake 
They follow the blind Boy. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

But soon they move with softer pace ; 
So have ye seen the fowler chase 
On Grasmere's clear unruffled breast 
A youngling of the wild-duck's nest 
With deftly-lifted oar ; 
Or as the wily sailors crept 
To seize (while on the Deep it slept) 
The hapless creature which did dwell 
Erewhile within the dancing shell, 
They steal upon their prey. 
With sound the least that can be made, 
They follow, more and more afraid, 
More cautious as they draw more near ; 
But in his darkness he can hear, 
And guesses their intent. 
a Lei-glia — Zei-gha" — he then cried out, 
" Zei-gha — Zei-gha" — with eager shout ; 
Thus did he cry, and thus did pray, 
And what he meant was, " Keep away, 
And leave me to myself !" 
Alas ! and when he felt their hands 
You 've often heard of magic wands, 
That with a motion overthrow 
A palace of the proudest show, 
Or melt it into air : 
So all his dreams — that inward light 
With which his soul had shone so bright — 
All vanished ; — 'twas a heartfelt cross 
To him, a heavy, bitter loss, 
As he had ever known. 
But hark ! a gratulating voice, 
With which the very hills rejoice : 
'Tis from the crowd, who tremblingly 
Have watched the event, and now can see 
That he is safe at last. 

And then, when he was brought to land, 
Full sure they were a happy band, 
Which, gathering round, did on the banks 
Of that great Water give God thanks, 
And welcomed the poor Child. 
And in the general joy of heart 
The blind Boy's little dog took part ; 
He leapt about, and oft did kiss 
His master's hands in sign of bliss, 
With sound like lamentation. 
But most of all, his Mother dear, 
She who had fainted with her fear, 
Rejoiced when waking she espies 
The Child ; when she can trust her eyes, 
And touches the blind Boy. 
She led him home, and wept amain, 
When he was in the house again : 
Tears flowed in torrents from her eyes ; 
She kissed him — how could she chastise I 
She was too happy far. 
Thus, after he had fondly braved 
The perilous Deep, the Boy was saved ; 
And, though his fancies had been wild, 
Yet he was pleased and reconciled 
To live in peace on shore. 
And in the lonely Highland dell 
Still do they keep the Turtle-shell ; 
And long the story will repeat 
Of the blind Boy's adventurous feat, 
And how he was preserved. 
Note. — It is recorded in Dampier's Voyages, that a boy, 
son of the captain of a Man-of-War, seated himself in a 
Turtle-shell, and floated in it from the shore to his fai oer'e 
ship, which lay at anchor at the distance of half a mile. 
In deference to the opinion of a Friend, I have substituted 
such a shell for the less elegant vessel in which my blind 
Voyager did actually entrust himself to the dangerous cur- 
rent of Loch Leven, as was related to me by an eye-witness. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND, 
. 

JGGESTED BY A BEAUTIFUL RUIN UPON ONE OP THE 
ISLANDS OP LOCH LOMOND, A PLACE CHOSEN FOR THE 
BETBEAT OF A SOLITARY INDIVIDUAL, FROM WHOM THIS 
HABITATION ACQUIRED THE NAME OF 

THE BROWNIE'S CELL. 
i. 
o barren heath, bleak moor, and quaking fen, 
r depth of labyrinthine glen ; 
,r into trackless forest set 
'/ith trees, whose lofty umbrage met ; 
/orld-wearied Men withdrew of yore ; 
IPenance their trust, and prayer their store ;) 
nd in the wilderness were bound 
o such apartments as they found ; 
;r with a new ambition raised ; 
hat God might suitably be praised. 
ii. 
•igh lodged the Warrior, like a bird of prey ; 
r where broad waters round him lay : 
ut this wild Ruin is no ghost 
f his devices — buried, lost ! 
Vithin this little lonely isle 
ihere stood a consecrated Pile ; 
/here tapers burned, and mass was sung, 
or them whose timid Spirits clung 
o mortal succour, though the tomb 
'.ad fixed, for ever fixed, then.' doom ! 
in. 
pon those servants of another world 
 hen madding Power her bolts had hurled, 
iheir habitation shook ; — it fell, 
, nd perished, save one narrow cell ; 
■Tiither, at length, a Wretch retired 
/ho neither grovelled nor aspired : 
'-e, struggling in the net of pride, 
he future scorned, the past defied ; 
Jtill tempering, from the unguilty forge 
f vain conceit, an iron scourge ! 
IV. 
roud Remnant was he of a fearless Race, 
yho stood and flourished face to face 

With their perennial hills ; — but Crime, 
Hastening the stern decrees of Time, 
Brought low a Power, which from its home 
Burst, when repose grew wearisome ; 
And, taking impulse from the sword, 
And, mocking its own plighted word, 
Had found, in ravage widely dealt, 
Its warfare's bourn, its travel's belt ! 

All, all were dispossessed, save him whose smile 
Shot lightning through this lonely Isle ! 
No right had he but what he made 
To this small spot, his leafy shade ; 
But the ground lay within that ring 
To which he only dared to cling ; 
Renouncing here, as worse than dead, 
The craven few who bowed the head 
Beneath the change ; who heard a claim 
How loud ! yet lived in peace with shame. 

From year to year this shaggy Mortal went 
(So seemed it) down a strange descent : 
Till they, who saw his outward frame, 
Fixed on him an unhallowed name ; 
Him, free from all malicious taint, 
And guiding, like the Patmos Saint, 
A pen unwearied — to indite, 
In his lone Isle, the dreams of night ; 
Impassioned dreams, that strove to span 
The faded glories of his Clan ! 

Suns that through blood their western harbour 
sought, 
And stars that in their courses fought ; 
Towers rent, winds combating with woods, 
Lands deluged by unbridled floods ; 
And beast and bird that from the spell 
Of sleep took import terrible ; — 
These types mysterious (if the show 
Of battle and the routed foe 
Had failed) would furnish an array 
Of matter for the dawning day ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

How disappeared He ? — ask the newt and toad, 
Inheritors of his abode ; 
The otter crouching undisturbed, 
In her dank cleft ;— but be thou curbed, 
froward Fancy ! 'mid a scene 
Of aspect winning and serene ; 
For those offensive creatures shun 
The inquisition of the sun ! 
And in this region flowers delight, 
And all is lovely to the sight. 
IX. 
Spring finds not here a melancholy breast, 
When she applies her annual test 
To dead and living ; when her breath 
Quickens, as now, the withered heath ; — 
Nor flaunting Summer — when he throws 
His soul into the briar-rose ; 
Or calls the lily from her sleep 
Prolonged beneath the bordering deep ; 
Nor Autumn, when the viewless wren 
Is warbling near the Brownie's Den. 

Wild Relique ! beauteous as the chosen spot 
In Nysa's isle, the embellished grot ; 
Whither, by care of Libyan Jove, 
(High Servant of paternal Love) 
Young Bacchus was conveyed — to lie 
Safe from his step-dame Rhea's eye ; 
Where bud, and bloom, and fruitage, glowed, 
Close-crowding round the infant-god ; 
All colours, — and the liveliest streak 
A foil to his celestial cheek ! 

COMPOSED AT CORA LINN, 
IN SIGHT OF WALLACE'S TOWER. 
' — ITow Wallace fought for Scotland, left the n:ime 
Of Wallace to be found, like a wild flower, 
AU over his dear Country ; left the deeds 
Of Wallace, like a family of ghosts, 
To people the steep rocks and river banks, 
Her natural sanctuaries, with a local soul 
Of independence and stern liberty.' MS. 
Lord of the vale ! astounding Flood ; 
The dullest leaf in this thick wood 
Quakes — conscious of thy power ; 
The caves reply with hollow moan ; 
And vibrates, to its central stone, 
Yon time-cemented Tower ! 

And yet how fair the rural scene ! 
For thou, Clyde, hast ever been 
Beneficent as strong ; 
Pleased in refreshing dews to steep 
The little trembling flowers that peep 
Thy shelving rocks among. 
Hence all who love their country, love 
To look on thee — delight to rove 
Where they thy voice can hear ; 
And, to the patriot-warrior's Shade, 
Lord of the vale ! to Heroes laid 
In dust, that voice is dear ! 
Along thy banks, at dead of night 
Sweeps visibly the Wallace Wight ; 
Or stands, in warlike vest, 
Aloft, beneath the moon's pale beam, 
A Champion worthy of the stream, 
Yon grey tower's living crest ! 
But clouds and envious darkness hide 
A Form not doubtfully descried : — 
Their transient mission o'er, 
say to what blind region flee 
These Shapes of awful phantasy ? 
To what untrodden shore ? 
Less than divine command they spurn ; 
But this we from the mountains learn, 
And this the valleys show ; 
That never will they deign to hold 
Communion where the heart is cold 
To human weal and woe. 
The man of abject soul in vain 
Shall walk the Marathonian plain ; 
Or thrid the shadowy gloom, 
That still invests the guardian Pass, 
Where stood, sublime, Leonidas 
Devoted to the tomb. 
And let no Slave his head incline, 
Or kneel, before the votive shrine 
By Uri's lake, where Tell 
Leapt, from his storm- vext boat, to land, 
Heaven's Instrument, for by his hand 
That day the Tyrant fell. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

EFFUSION, 
S THE PLEASURE-GROUND ON THE BANKS OF THE BRAN, 
NEAR DONKELD. 
' The waterfall, by a loud roaring, warned us when we 
aust expect it. We were first, however, conducted into 
, small apartment, where the Gardener desired us to look 
t a picture of Ossian, which, while he was telling the 
istory of the young Artist who executed the work, dis- 
ppeared, parting in the middle— flying asunder as by the 
mch of magic — and lo ! we are at the entrance of a 
jlendid apartment, which was almost dizzy and alive 
ith waterfalls, that tumbled in all directions ; the great 
iscade, opposite the window, which faced us, being 
iflected in innumerable mirrors upon the ceiling and 
;ainst the walls.'— Extractfrom the Journal of my Fellow- 
raveller. 
What He — who, mid the kindred throng 
, Of Heroes that inspired Ms song, 
Doth yet frequent the hill of storms, 
I The stars dim-twinlding through their forms ! 
What ! Ossian here — a painted Thrall, 
: Mute fixture on a stuccoed wall ; 
■ To serve — an unsuspected screen 
For show that must not yet be seen ; 
And, when the moment comes, to part 
And vanish by mysterious art ; 
 Head, harp, and body, split asunder, 
For ingress to a world of wonder ; 
, A gay saloon, with waters dancing 
i Upon the sight wherever glancing ; 
One loud cascade in front, and lo ! 
 A thousand like it, white as snow — 
Streams on the walls, and torrent-foam 
As active round the hollow dome, 
Illusive cataracts ! of their terrors 
Not stripped, nor voiceless in the mirrors, 
That catch the pageant from the flood 
Thundering adown a rocky wood. 
What pains to dazzle and confound ! 
| What strife of colour, shape and sound 
: In this quaint medley, that might seem 
! Devised out of a sick man's dream ! 
Strange scene, fantastic and uneasy 
As ever made a maniac dizzy, 
When disenchanted from the mood 
That loves on sullen thoughts to brood ! 
Nature — in thy changeful visions, 
Through all thy most abrupt transitions 
Smooth, graceful, tender, or sublime— 
;Ever averse to pantomime, 

Thee neither do they know nor us 
Thy servants, who can trifle thus ; 
Else verily the sober powers 
Of rock that frowns, and stream that roars, 
Exalted by congenial sway 
Of Spirits, and the undying Lay, 
And Names that moulder not away, 
Had wakened some redeeming thought 
More worthy of this favoured Spot ; 
Recalled some feeling— to set free 
The Bard from such indignity ! 
 The Effigies of a valiant Wight 
I once beheld, a Templar Knight ; 
Not prostrate, not like those that rest 
On tombs, with palms together prest, 
But sculptured out of living stone, 
And standing upright and alone, 
Both hands with rival energy 
Employed in setting his sword free 
From its dull sheath — stern sentinel 
Intent to guard St. Robert's cell ; 
As if with memory of the affray 
Far distant, when, as legends say, 
The Monks of Fountain's thronged to force 
From its dear home the Hermit's corse, 
That in their keeping it might he, 
To crown their abbey's sanctity. 
So had they rushed into the grot 
Of sense despised, a world forgot, 
And torn him from his loved retreat, 
Where altar-stone and rock-hewn seat 
Still hint that quiet best is found, 
Even by the Living, under ground ; 
But a bold Knight, the selfish aim 
Defeating, put the Monks to shame, 
There where you see his Image stand 
Bare to the sky, with threatening brand 
Which lingering Nid is proud to show 
Reflected in the pool below. 
Thus, like the men of earliest days, 
Our sires set forth their grateful praise : 
Uncouth the workmanship, and rude ! 
But, nursed in mountain solitude, 
Might some aspiring artist dare 
To seize whate'er, through misty air, 
A ghost, by glimpses, may present 
Of imitable lineament, 
And give the phantom an array 
That less should scorn the abandoned clay ; 
Then let him hew with patient stroke 
An Ossian out of mural rock, 

 On the banks of the River Nid, near Knaresborough. 


 POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

And leave the figurative Man — 


Upon thy margin, roaring Bran ! — 


Fixed, like the Templar of the steep, 


An everlasting watch to keep ; 

IV. 

With local sanctities in trust, 


More precious than a hermit's dust ; 

YARROW VISITED, 

And virtues through the mass infused, 

SEPTEMBER, . 

Which old idolatry abused. 



(See page ). 

What though the Granite would deny 

And is this — Yarrow  — This the Stream 

All fervour to the sightless eye ; 

Of which my fancy cherished, 

And touch from rising suns in vain 

So faithfully, a waking dream ? 

Solicit a Memnonian strain ; 

An image that hath perished ! 

Yet, in some fit of anger sharp, 

that some Minstrel's harp were near, 

The wind might force the deep-grooved harp 

To utter notes of gladness, 

To utter melancholy moans 

And chase this silence from the air, 

Not unconnected with the tones 

That fills my heart with sadness ! 

Of soul-sick flesh and weary hones ; 


While grove and river notes would lend, 

Yet why ? — a silvery current flows 

Less deeply sad, with these to blend ! 

With uncontrolled meanderings ; 


Nor have these eyes by greener hills 

Vain pleasures of luxurious life, 

Been soothed, in all my wanderings. 

For ever with yourselves at strife ; 

And, through her depths, Saint Mary's Lake 

Through town and country both deranged 

Is visibly delighted ; 

By affectations interchanged, 

For not a feature of those hills 

And all the perishable gauds 

Is in the mirror slighted. 

That heaven-deserted man applauds ; 


When will your hapless patrons learn 

A blue sky bends o'er Yarrow vale, 

To watch and ponder — to discern 

Save where that pearly whiteness 

The freshness, the everlasting youth, 

Is round the rising sun diffused, 

Of admiration sprung from truth ; 

A tender hazy brightness ; 

From beauty infinitely growing 

Mild dawn of promise ! that excludes 

Upon a mind with love o'erfiowing — 

All profitless dejection ; 

To sound the depths of every Art 

Though not unwilling here to admit 

That seeks its wisdom through the heart ? 

A pensive recollection. 

Thus (where the intrusive Pile, ill-graced 

Where was it that the famous Flower 

With baubles of theatric taste, 

Of Yarrow Vale lay bleeding ? 

O'erlooks the torrent breathing showers 

His bed perchance was yon smooth mound 

On motley bands of alien flowers 

On which the herd is feeding : 

In stiff confusion set or sown, 

And haply from this crystal pool, 

Till Nature cannot find her own, 

Now peaceful as the morning, 

Or keep a remnant of the sod 

The Water-wraith ascended thrice — 

Which Caledonian Heroes trod) 

And gave his doleful warning. 

I mused ; and, thirsting for redress, 


Recoiled into the wilderness. 

Delicious is the Lay that sings 


The haunts of happy Lovers, 


The path that leads them to the grove, 


The leafy grove that covers : 



And Pity sanctifies the Verse 


That paints, by strength of sorrow, 


The unconquerable strength of love ; 


Bear witness, rueful Yarrow ! 




MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND. 

 

But thou, that didst appear so fair 
To fond imagination, 
Dost rival in the light of day 
Her delicate creation : 
Meek loveliness is round thee spread, 
A softness still and holy ; 
The grace of forest charms decayed, 
And pastoral melancholy. 
That region left, the vale unfolds 
Rich groves of lofty stature, 
With Yarrow winding through the pomp 
Of cultivated nature ; 
And, rising from those lofty groves, 
Behold a Ruin hoary ! 
The shattered front of Newark's Towers, 
Renowned in Border story. 
Fair scenes for childhood's opening bloom, 
For sportive youth to stray in ; 
For manhood to enjoy his strength ; 
And age to wear away in ! 
Yon cottage seems a bower of bliss, 
A covert for protection 
Of tender thoughts, that nestle there — 
The brood of chaste affection. 

How sweet, on this autumnal day, 
The wild-wood fruits to gather, 
And on my True-love's forehead plant 
A crest of blooming heather ! 
And what if I enwreathed my own ! 
'Twere no offence to reason ; 
The sober Hills thus deck their brows 
To meet the wintry season. 
I see — but not by sight alone, 
Loved Yarrow, have I won thee; 
A ray of fancy still survives — 
Her sunshine plays upon thee ! 
Thy ever-youthful waters keep 
A course of lively pleasure ; 
And gladsome notes my lips can breathe, 
Accordant to the measure. 
The vapours linger round the Heights, 
They melt, and soon must vanish ; 
One hour is theirs, nor more is mine — 
Sad thought, which I would banish, 
But that I know, where'er I go, 
Thy genuine image, Yarrow ! 
Will dwell with me — to heighten joy, 
And cheer my mind in sorrow. 

r 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

POEMS DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND 
LIBERTY. 

PART I. 

COMPOSED BY THE SEA-SIDE, NEAR CALAIS, 
AUGUST, . 
Fair Star of evening, Splendour of the west, 
Star of my Country ! — on the horizon's brink 
Thou hangest, stooping, as might seem, to sink 
On England's bosom ; yet well pleased to rest, 
Meanwhile, and be to her a glorious crest 
Conspicuous to the Nations. Thou, I think, 
Should'st be my Country's emblem ; and should'st 
wink, 
Bright Star ! with laughter on her banners, drest 
In thy fresh beauty. There ! that dusky spot 
Beneath thee, that is England ; there she lies. 
Blessings be on you both ! one hope, one lot, 
One life, one glory ! — I, with many a fear 
For my dear Country, many heartfelt sighs, 
Among men who do not love her, linger here. 

CALAIS, AUGUST, . 
Is it a reed that 's shaken by the wind, 
Or what is it that ye go forth to see ? 
Lords, lawyers, statesmen, squires of low degree, 
Men known, and men unknown, sick, lame, and 
blind, 
Post forward all, like creatures of one kind, 
With first-fruit offerings crowd to bend the knee 
In France, before the new-born Majesty. 
'Tis ever thus. Ye men of prostrate mind, 
A seemly reverence may be paid to power ; 
But that 's a loyal virtue, never sown 
In haste, nor springing with a transient shower : 
When truth, when sense, when liberty were flown, 
What hardship had it been to wait an hour ? 
Shame on you, feeble Heads, to slavery prone ! 

Composed near Calais, on the road leading: to Ardres, August , i 
Jones ! as from Calais southward you and I 
Went pacing side by side, this public Way 
Streamed with the pomp of a too-credulous day. 
When faith was pledged to new-born Liberty : 
A homeless sound of joy was in the sky: 
From hour to hour the antiquated Earth, 
Beat like the heart of Man : songs, garlands, mirth J 
Banners, and happy faces, far and nigh ! 
And now, sole register that these things were, 
Two solitary greetings have I heard, 
' Good morrow, Citizen  ' a hollow word, 
As if a dead man spake it ! Yet despair 
Touches me not, though pensive as a bird 
Whose vernal coverts winter hath laid bare f. 

. 
I grieved for Buonaparte, with a vain 
And an unthinking grief ! The tenderest raood 
Of that Man's mind — what can it be ? what food 
Fed his first hopes  what knowledge could he j 
'Tis not in battles that from youth we train 
The Governor who must be wise and good, 
And temper with the sternness of the brain 
Thoughts motherly, and meek as womanhood. 
Wisdom doth five with children round her knee 
Books, leisure, perfect freedom, and the talk 
Man holds with week-day man in the hourly wal 
Of the mind's business : these are the degrees I 
By which true Sway doth mount ; this is the stai 
True Power doth grow on; and her rights ai 
these. 

 th July, . 

 SoeNote. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

CALAIS, AUGUST , . 
stivals have I seen that were not names : 
'lis is young Buonaparte's natal day, 
.id his is henceforth an established sway — 
dhsul for life. With worship France proclaims 
jsp approbation, and with pomps and games, 
iaven grant that other Cities may be gay ! 
ulais is not : and I have bent my way 
'! the sea-coast, noting that each man frames 
fs business as he likes. Far other show 
'if youth here witnessed, in a prouder time ; 
le senselessness of joy was then sublime ! 
vPP v ^ s ne > w h°> caring not for Pope, 
•JQSul, or King, can sound himself to know 
r e destiny of Man, and live in hope. 

THE EXTINCTION OF THE VENETIAN REPUBLIC. 
< ce did She hold the gorgeous east in fee ; 
d was the safeguard of the west : the worth 
Venice did not fall below her birth, 
nice, the eldest Child of Liberty. 
'i was a maiden City, bright and free ; 
II guile seduced, no force could violate ; 
M, when she took unto herself a Mate, 
le must espouse the everlasting Sea. 
j',d what if she had seen those glories fade, 
r .jose titles vanish, and that strength decay ; 
It shall some tribute of regret be paid 
wen her long life hath reached its final day : 
Jjn are we, and must grieve when even the Shade 
(ithat which once was great, is passed away. 

THE KING OF SWEDEN. 
| e Voice of song from distant lands shall call 
that great King ; shall hail the crowned Youth 
io, taking counsel of unbending Truth, 
one example hath set forth to all 
w they with dignity may stand ; or fall, 
I all they must. Now, whither doth it tend ? 
la what to him and his shall be the end ? 
"iit thought is one which neither can appal 
ISr cheer him ; for the illustrious Swede hath done 
') thing which ought to be ; is raised above 

consequences : work he hath begun 
fortitude, and piety, and love, 
uch all his glorious ancestors approve : 
h heroes bless him, him their rightful son . 

 See note. 

TO TOUSSAINT L OUVERTURE. 
Toussaint, the most unhappy man of men ! 
Whether the whistling Rustic tend his plough 
Within thy hearing, or thy head be now 
Pillowed in some deep dungeon's earless den ; — 
miserable Chieftain ! where and when 
Wilt thou find patience ? Yet die not ; do thou 
Wear rather in thy bonds a cheerful brow : 
Though fallen thyself, never to rise again, 
Live, and take comfort. Thou hast left behind 
Powers that will work for thee ; ah', earth, and skies ; 
There 's not a breathing of the common wind 
That will forget thee ; thou hast great allies ; 
Thy friends are exultations, agonies, 
And love, and man's unconquerable mind. 
IX. 
SEPTEMBER , . 
Amons the capricious acts of tyranny that disgraced those times, was 
the chasing of al INegroe's from France by decree of the govern- 
ment : we had a Fellow-passenger who was one of the expelled. 
We had a female Passenger who came 
From Calais with us, spotless in array, — 
A white-robed Negro, like a lady gay, 
Yet downcast as a woman fearing blame ; 
Meek, destitute, as seemed, of hope or aim 
She sate, from notice turning not away, 
But on all proffered intercourse did lay 
A weight of languid speech, or to the same 
No sign of answer made by word or face : 
Yet still her eyes retained their tropic fire, 
That, burning independent of the mind, 
Joined with the lustre of her rich attire 
To mock the Outcast — ye Heavens, be kind ! 
And feel, thou Earth, for this afflicted Race ! 

COMPOSED IN THE VALLEY NEAR DOVER, ON THE 
DAY OF LANDING. 
Here, on our native soil, we breathe once more. 
The cock that crows, the smoke that curls, that sound 
Of bells ; — those boys who in yon meadow-ground 
In white-sleeved shirts are playing ; and the roar 
Of the waves breaking on the chalky shore ; — 
All, all are English. Oft have I looked round 
With joy in Kent's green vales ; but never found 
Myself so satisfied in heart before. 
Europe is yet in bonds ; but let that pass, 
Thought for another moment. Thou art free, 
My Country ! and 'tis joy enough and pride 
For one hour's perfect bliss, to tread the grass 
Of England once again, and hear and see, 
With such a dear Companion at my side. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

SEPTEMBER, . NEAR DOVER. 
Inland, within a hollow vale, I stood ; 
And saw, while sea was calm and air was clear, 
The coast of France — the coast of Prance how near ! 
Drawn almost into frightful neighbourhood. 
I shrunk ; for verily the barrier flood 
Was like a lake, or river bright and fair, 
A span of waters ; yet what power is there ! 
What mightiness for evil and for good ! 
Even so doth God protect us if we be 
Virtuous and wise. Winds blow, and waters roll, 
Strength to the brave, and Power, and Deity ; 
Yet in themselves are nothing ! One decree 
Spake laws to them, and said that by the soul 
Only, the Nations shall be great and free. 

THOUGHT OF A BRITON ON THE SUBJUGATION OF 
SWITZERLAND. 
Two Voices are there ; one is of the sea, 
One of the mountains ; each a mighty Voice : 
In both from age to age thou didst rejoice, 
They were thy chosen music, Liberty ! 
There came a Tyrant, and with holy glee 
Thou fought'st against him ; but hast vainly striven : 
Thou from thy Alpine holds at length art driven, 
Where not a torrent murmurs heard by thee. 
Of one deep bliss thine ear hath been bereft : 
Then cleave, cleave to tbat which still is left: 
For, high-souled Maid, what sorrow would it be 
That Mountain floods should thunder as before, 
And Ocean bellow from his rocky shore, 
And neither awful Voice be heard by thee ! 

WRITTEN IN LONDON, SEPTEMBER, . 
Friend ! I know not which way I must look 
For comfort, being, as I am, opprest, 
To think that now our life is only drest 
For show ; mean handy-work of craftsman, cook, 
Or groom ! — We must run glittering like a brook 
In the open sunshine, or we are unblest : 
The wealthiest man among us is the best : 
No grandeur now in nature or in book 
Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense, 
This is idolatry ; and these we adore : 
Plain living and high thinking are no more : 
The homely beauty of the good old cause 
Is gone ; our peace, our fearful innocence, 
And pure religion breathing household laws. 

LONDON, . 
Milton ! thou should'st be living at this hour : 
England hath need of thee : she is a fen 
Of stagnant waters : altar, sword, and pen, 
Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower, 
Have forfeited their ancient English dower 
Of inward happiness. We are selfish men ; 
Oh ! raise us up, return to us again ; 
And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power. 
Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart : 
Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea : 
Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free, 
So didst thou travel on life's common way, 
In cheerful godliness ; and yet thy heart 
The lowliest duties on herself did lay. 

Great men have been among us ; hands that penned 
And tongues that uttered wisdom — better none : 
The later Sidney, Marvel, Harrington, 
Young Vane, and others who called Milton friend. 
These moralists could act and comprehend : 
They knew how genuine glory was put on ; 
Taught us how rightfully a nation shone 
In splendour : what strength was, that would not 
bend 
But in magnanimous meekness. France, 'tis - 
Hath brought forth no such souls as we had then. 
Perpetual emptiness ■ unceasing change ! 
No single volume paramount, no code, 
No master spirit, no determined road ; 
But equally a want of books and men ! 

It is not to be thought of that the Flood 
Of British freedom, which, to the open sea 
Of the world's praise, from dark antiquity 
Hath flowed, ' with pomp of waters, unwithstood,' 
Roused though it be full often to a mood 
Which spurns the check of salutary bands, 
That this most famous Stream in bogs and sands 
Should perish ; and to evil and to good 
Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung 
Armoury of the invincible Knights of old : 
We must be free or die, who speak the tongue 
That Shakspeare spake ; the faith and morals hoi 
Which Milton held. — In every thing we are spruii 
Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

hen I have borne in memory what has tamed 
■eat Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart 
hen men change swords for ledgers, and desert 
.e student's bower for gold, some fears unnamed 
tad, my Country ! — am I to be blamed ? 
>w, when I think of thee, and what thou art, 
•rily, in the bottom of my heart, 
I those unfihal fears I am ashamed. 
" r dearly must we prize thee ; we who find 
; thee a bulwark for the cause of men ; 
.nd I by my affection was beguiled : 
hat wonder if a Poet now and then, 
aong the many movements of his mind, 
It for thee as a lover or a child ! 

OCTOBER, . 
 e might believe that natural miseries 
,d blasted France, and made of it a land 
Vfit for men ; and that in one great band 
 r sons were bursting forth, to dwell at ease. 
],t 'tis a chosen soil, where sun and breeze 
fed gentle favours : rural works are there, 
Id ordinary business without care ; 
fbt rich in all things that can soothe and please ! 
llw piteous then that there should be such dearth 
< knowledge ; that whole myriads should unite 
' work against themselves such fell despite : 
buld come in phrensy and in drunken mirth, 
Ipatient to put out the only light 
( Liberty that yet remains on earth ! 

Iere is a bondage worse, far worse, to bear 
;m his who breathes, by roof, and floor, and wall, 
J it in, a Tyrant's solitary Thrall : 
''Is his who walks about in the open air, 
I 
] 

 of a Nation who, henceforth, must wear 
ir fetters in their souls. For who could be, 
^ io, even the best, in such condition, free 
I >m self-reproach, reproach that he must share 
^th Human-nature ? Never be it ours 
I see the sun how brightly it will shine, 
^  know that noble feelings, manly powers, 
I bead of gathering strength, must droop and pine; 
^  earth with all her pleasant fruits and flowers 
Pie, and participate in man's decline. 

OCTOBER, . 
These times strike monied worldlings with dismay: 
Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air 
With words of apprehension and despair : 
While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray, 
Men unto whom sufficient for the day 
And minds not stinted or untilled are given, 
Sound, healthy, children of the God of heaven, 
Are cheerful as the rising sun in May. 
What do we gather hence but firmer faith 
That every gift of noble origin 
Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath ; 
That virtue and the faculties within 
Are vital, — and that riches are akin 
To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death ? 

England ! the time is come when thou should'st 
wean 
Thy heart from its emasculating food ; 
The truth should now be better understood ; 
Old things have been unsettled ; we have seen 
Fair seed-time, better harvest might have been 
But for thy trespasses ; and, at this day, 
If for Greece, Egypt, India, Africa, 
Aught good were destined, thou would'st step 
between. 
England ! all nations in this charge agree : 
But worse, more ignorant in love and hate, 
Far — far more abject, is thine Enemy : 
Therefore the wise pray for thee, though the freight 
Of thy offences be a heavy weight : 
Oh grief that Earth's best hopes rest all with Thee ! 

OCTOBER, . 
When, looking on the present face of things, 
I see one Man, of men the meanest too ! 
Raised up to sway the world, to do, undo, 
With mighty Nations for his underlings, 
The great events with which old story rings 
Seem vain and hollow ; I find nothing great : 
Nothing is left which I can venerate ; 
So that a doubt almost within me springs 
Of Providence, such emptiness at length 
Seems at the heart of all things. But, great God! 
I measure back the steps which I have trod ; 
And tremble, seeing whence proceeds the strength 
Of such poor Instruments, with thoughts sublime 
I tremble at the sorrow of the time. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

TO THE MEN OF KENT. OCTOBER, . 
Vanguard of Liberty, ye men of Kent, 
Ye children of a Soil that doth advance 
Her haughty brow against the coast of France, 
Now is the time to prove your hardiment ! 
To France be words of invitation sent ! 
They from their fields can see the countenance 
Of your fierce war, may ken the glittering lance, 
And hear you shouting forth your brave intent. 
Left single, in bold parley, ye, of yore, 
Did from the Norman win a gallant wreath ; 
Confirmed the charters that were yours before ;- 
No parleying now ! In Britain is one breath ; 
We all are with you now from shore to shore : — 
Ye men of Kent, 'tis victory or death ! 

What if our numbers barely could defy 
The arithmetic of babes, must foreign hordes, 
Slaves, vile as ever were befooled by words, 
Striking through English breasts the anarchy 
Of Terror, bear us to the ground, and tie 
Our hands behind our backs with felon cords  
Yields every thing to discipline of swords ? 
Is man as good as man, none low, none high ?- 
Nor discipline nor valour can withstand 
The shock, nor quell the inevitable rout, 
When in some great extremity breaks out 
A people, on their own beloved Land 
Risen, like one man, to combat in the sight 
Of a just God for liberty and right. 

LINES ON THE EXPECTED INVASION. 
. 
Come ye — who, if (which Heaven avert !) the Land 
Were with herself at strife, would take your stand, 
Like gallant Falkland, by the Monarch's side, 
And, like Montrose, make Loyalty your pride — 
Come ye — who, not less zealous, might display 
Banners at enmity with regal sway, 
And, like the Pyms and Miltons of that day, 
Think that a State would live in sounder health 
If Kingship bowed its head to Commonwealth — ■ 
Ye too — whom no discreditable fear 
Would keep, perhaps 'with many a fruitless tear, 
Uncertain what to choose and how to steer — 
And ye — who might mistake for sober sense 
And wise reserve the plea of indolence — 

Come ye — whate'er your creed — waken all 
Whate'er your temper, at your Country's call • 
Resolving (this a free-bom Nation can) 
To have one Soul, and perish to a man, 
Or save this honoured Land from every Lord 
But British reason and the British sword. 

ANTICIPATION. OCTOBER, . 
Shout, for a mighty Victory is won ! 
On British ground the Invaders are laid low ; 
The breath of Heaven has drifted them like s an 
And left them lying in the silent sun, 
Never to rise again ! — the work is done. 
Come forth, ye old men, now in peaceful show 
And greet your sons ! drums beat and trumpets blow 
Make merry, wives ! ye little children, stun 
Your grandame's ears with pleasure of your noise 
Clap, infants, clap your hands ! Divine must be 
That triumph, when the very worst, the paia, 
And even the prospect of our brethren slain, 
Hath something in it which the heart enjoys : — 
In glory will they sleep and endless sanctity. 

NOVEMBER, . 
Another year ! — another deadly blow ! 
Another mighty Empire overthrown ! 
And We are left, or shall be left, alone : 
The last that dare to struggle with the Foe. 
'Tis well ! from this day forward we shall know 
That in ourselves our safety must be sought ; 
That by our own right hands it must be wrought 
That we must stand unpropped, or be laid low. 
O dastard whom such foretaste doth not clu er ! 
We shall exult, if they who rule the land 
Be men who hold its many blessings dear, 
Wise, upright, valiant ; not a servile band, 
Who are to judge of danger which they fear, 
And honour which they do not understand. 


XXVIII. 
ODE. 

Who rises on the banks of Seine, 
And binds her temples with the civic wreath ? 
What joy to read the promise of her mien ! 
How sweet to rest her wide-spread wings beneatl 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

But they are ever playing, 
And twinkling in the light, 
And, if a breeze be straying, 
That breeze she will invite ; 
:,.nd stands on tiptoe, conscious she is fair, 
.nd calls a look of love into her face, 
!,nd spreads her arms, as if the general air 
t lone could satisfy her wide embrace. 
-Melt, Principalities, before her melt ! 
ler love ye hailed — her wrath have felt ! 
'ut She through many a change of form hath gone, 
Lnd stands amidst you now an armed creature, 
|/hose panoply is not a thing put on, 
!ut the live scales of a portentous nature ; 
hat, having forced its way from birth to birth, 
talks round — abhorred by Heaven, a terror to 
the Earth ! 
n. 
! I marked the breathings of her dragon crest ; 
[y Soul, a sorrowful interpreter, 
 many a midnight vision bowed 
efore the ominous aspect of her spear ; 
whether the mighty beam, in scorn upheld, 
threatened her foes, — or, pompously at rest, 
pemed to bisect her orbed shield, 
Is stretches a blue bar of solid cloud 
icross the setting sun and all the fiery west. 

 So did she daunt the Earth, and God defy ! 
lnd, wheresoe'er she spread her sovereignty, 
Dilution tainted all that was most pure. 
;-Have we not known — and live we not to tell — 
pat Justice seemed to hear her final knell ? 
faith buried deeper in her own deep breast 
ier stores, and sighed to find them insecure ! 
d Hope was maddened by the drops that fell 
om shades, her chosen place of short-lived rest. 
jiame followed shame, and woe supplanted woe — 
■ this the only change that time can show ? 
W long shall vengeance sleep ? Ye patient 
Heavens, how long ? 
nfirm ejaculation ! from the tongue 
Nations wanting virtue to be strong 
o to the measure of accorded might, 
id daring not to feel the majesty of right ! 
IV. 
Weak Spirits are there — who would ask, 
)on the pressure of a painful thing, 
ie lion's sinews, or the eagle's wing ; 
let their wishes loose, in forest-glade, 
Among the lurking powers 
Of herbs and lowly flowers, 
seek, from saints above, miraculous aid — 

That Man may be accomplished for a task 
Which his own nature hath enjoined ; — and why \ 
If, when that interference hath relieved him, 
He must sink down to languish 
In worse than former helplessness— and lie 
Till the caves roar, — and, imbecility 
Again engendering anguish, [ceived him. 
The same weak wish returns, that had before de- 
v. 
But Thou, supreme Disposer ! may'st not speed 
The course of things, and change the creed 
Which hath been held aloft before men's sight 
Since the first framing of societies, 
Whether, as bards have told in ancient song, 
Built up by soft seducing harmonies ; 
Or prest together by the appetite, 
And by the power, of wrong. 

PART II. 
i. 
ON A CELEBRATED EVENT IN ANCIENT HISTORY. 
A Roman Master stands on Grecian ground, 
And to the people at the Isthmian Games 
Assembled, He, by a herald's voice, proclaims 
The Liberty of Greece : — the words rebound 
Until all voices hi one voice are drowned ; 
Glad acclamation by which air was rent ! 
And birds, high flying in the element, 
Dropped to the earth, astonished at the sound ! 
Yet were the thoughtful grieved; and still that voice 
Haunts, with sad echoes, musing Fancy's ear : 
Ah ! that a Conqueror's words should be so dear : 
Ah ! that a boon could shed such rapturous joys ! 
A gift of that which is not to be given 
By all the blended powers of Earth and Heaven. 

UPON THE SAME EVENT. 
When, far and wide, swift as the beams of morn 
The tidings passed of servitude repealed, 
And of that joy which shook the Isthmian Field, 
The rough ^Etohans smiled with bitter scorn. 
" 'Tis known," cried they, " that he, who would adorn 
His envied temples with the Isthmian crown, 
Must either win, through effort of his own, 
The prize, or be content to see it worn 
By more deserving brows. — Yet so ye prop, 
Sons of the brave who fought at Marathon, 
Your feeble spirits ! Greece her head hath bowed, 
As if the wreath of liberty thereon 
Would fix itself as smoothly as a cloud, 
Which, at Jove's will, descends on Pelion's top." 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

TO THOMAS CLARKSOX, OX THE FINAL PASSING OF THE 
BILL FOB THE ABOLITION OF THE SLATE TEADE. 
March, . 
Clarkson ! it was an obstinate hill to climb : 
How toilsome — nay, how dire — it was, by thee 
Is known ; by none, perhaps, so feelingly : 
But thou, who, starting in thy fervent prime, 
Didst first lead forth that enterprise sublime, 
Hast heard the constant Voice its charge repeat, 
Which, out of thy young hearts oracular seat, 
First roused thee. — true yoke-fellow of Time, 
Duty's intrepid liegeman, see, the palm 
Is won, and by all Nations shall be worn ! 
The blood-stained Writing is for ever torn ; 
And thou henceforth wilt have a good man's calm, 
A great man's happiness ; thy zeal shall find 
Repose at length, firm friend of human kind ! 

A PROPHECY. FEBRUARY, . 
High deeds, Germans, are to come from you ! 
Thus in your books the record shall be found, 
'A watchword was pronounced, a potent sound — 
Arminius ! — all the people quaked like dew 
Stirred by the breeze ; they rose, a Nation, true, 
True to herself — the mighty Germany, 
She of the Danube and the Northern Sea, 
She rose, and off at once the yoke she threw. 
All power was given her in the dreadful trance ; 
Those new-born Kings she withered like a flame.' 
— Woe to them all ! but heaviest woe and shame 
To that Bavarian who could first advance 
His banner in accursed league with France, 
First open traitor to the German name ! 

COMPOSED BY THE SIDE OF GRASMERE LAKE. 
- 
Clouds, lingering yet, extend in solid bars 
Through the grey west ; and lo ! these waters, steeled 
By breezeless air to smoothest polish, yield 
A vivid repetition of the stars ; 
Jove, Venus, and the ruddy crest of Mars 
Amid his fellows beauteously revealed 
At happy distance from earth's groaning field, 
Where ruthless mortals wage incessant wars. 
Is it a mirror \ — or the nether Sphere 
Opening to view the abyss in which she feeds 
Her own calm fires ? — But list ! a voice is near ; 
Great Pan himself low-whispering through the 
" Be thankful, thou ; for, if unholy deeds [reeds, 
Ravage the world, tranquillity is here!" 



Go back to antique ages, if thine eyes 
The genuine mien and character would trace 
Of the rash Spirit that still holds her place, 
Prompting the world's audacious vanities ! 
Go back, and see the Tower of Babel rise ; 
The pyramid extend its monstrous base, 
For some Aspirant of our short-lived race, 
Anxious an aery name to immortalize. 
There, too, ere wiles and politic dispute 
Gave specious colouring to aim and act, 
See the first mighty Hunter leave the brute— 
To chase mankind, with men in armies packei 
For his field-pastime high and absolute, 
While, to dislodge his game, cities are sacked ! 

VII. 
COMPOSED WHILE THE AUTHOR WAS ENGAGED  
WRITING A TRACT, OCCASIONED BY THE CONVEX 
TION OF CINTRA. 
. 
Not 'mid the World's vain objects that enslave 
The free-born Soul — that World whose vaunted skil f 
In selfish interest perverts the will, 
Whose factions lead astray the wise and brave- 
Not there ; but in dark wood and rocky cave, 
And hollow vale which foaming torrents fill 
With omnipresent murmur as they rave 
Down their steep beds, that never shall be still : 
Here, mighty Nature ! in this school sublime 
I weigh the hopes and fears of suffering Spain ; 
For her consult the auguries of time, 
And through the human heart explore my way ; 
And look and listen— gathering, whence I may, 
Triumph, and thoughts no bondage can restrain. 

COMPOSED AT THE SAME TIME AND ON THE SAM 
OCCASION. 
I dropped my pen ; and listened to the Wind 
That sang of trees up-torn and vessels tost — 
A midnight harmony ; and wholly lost 
To the general sense of men by chains confined 
Of business, care, or pleasure ; or resigned 
To timely sleep. Thought I, the impassioned straiij 
Which, without aid of numbers, I sustain, 
Like acceptation from the World will find. 
Yet some with apprehensive ear shall drink 
A dirge devoutly breathed o'er sorrows past ; 
And to the attendant promise will give heed — 
The prophecy,— like that of this wild blast, 
Which, while it makes the heart with sadness sh: 
Tells also of bright calms that shall succeed. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

HOFFER. 
P mortal parents is the Hero born 
W whom the undaunted Tyrolese are led ? 
p is it TelFs great Spirit, from the dead 
eturned to animate an age forlorn ? 
je comes like Phoebus through the gates of morn 
Tien dreary darkness is discomfited, 
pt mark his modest state ! upon his head, 
jiat simple crest, a heron's plume, is worn. 
Liberty ! they stagger at the shock 
pom van to rear — and with one mind would flee, 
at half their host is buried : — rock on rock 
ascends : — beneath this godlike Warrior, see ! 
ills, torrents, woods, embodied to bemock 
le Tyrant, and confound his cruelty. 

dvance — come forth from thy Tyrolean ground, 
ear Liberty ! stern Nymph of soul untamed ; 
veet Nymph, rightly of the mountains named ! 
irough the long chain of Alps from mound to 
mound 
ad o'er the eternal snows, like Echo, bound ; 
ke Echo, when the hunter train at dawn 
lave roused her from her sleep : and forest-lawn, 
iffs, woods and caves, her viewless steps resound 
ad babble of her pastime ! — On, dread Power ! 
ith such invisible motion speed thy flight, 
irough hanging clouds, from craggy height to 
height, 
ough the green vales and through the herds- 
man's bower — 
at all the Alps may gladden in thy might, 
Te, there, and in all places at one hour. 

FEELINGS OF THE TYROLESE. 
e Land we from our fathers had in trust, 
ud to our children will transmit, or die : 
iiis is our maxim, this our piety ; 
nd God and Nature say that it is just, 
lat which we would perform in arms — we must ! 
,'e read the dictate in the infant's eye ; 
v the wife's smile ; and in the placid sky ; 
nd, at our feet, amid the silent dust 
I them that were before us. — Sing aloud 
Id songs, the precious music of the heart ! 
jive, herds and flocks, your voices to the wind ! 
r hile we go forth, a self-devoted crowd, 
Fith weapons grasped in fearless hands, to assert 
jnr virtue, and to vindicate mankind. 

Alas ! what boots the long laborious quest 
Of moral prudence, sought through good and ill ; 
Or pains abstruse — to elevate the will, 
And lead us on to that transcendent rest 
Where every passion shall the sway attest 
Of Reason, seated on her sovereign hill ; 
What is it but a vain and curious skill, 
If sapient Germany must lie deprest, 
Beneath the brutal sword ? — Her haughty Schools 
Shall blush ; and may not we with sorrow say, 
A few strong instincts and a few plain rules, 
Among the -herdsmen of the Alps, have wrought 
More for mankind at this unhappy day 
Than all the pride of intellect and thought ? 

And is it among rude untutored Dales, 
There, and there only, that the heart is true ? 
And, rising to repel or to subdue, 
Is it by rocks and woods that man prevails  
Ah no ! though Nature's dread protection fails, 
There is a bulwark in the soul. This knew 
Iberian Burghers when the sword they drew 
In Zaragoza, naked to the gales 
Of fiercely-breathing war. The truth was felt 
By Palafox, and many a brave compeer, 
Like him of noble birth and noble mind ; 
By ladies, meek-eyed women without fear ; 
And wanderers of the street, to whom is dealt 
The bread which without industry they find. 

O'er the wide earth, on mountain" and on plain, 
Dwells in the affections and the soul of man 
A Godhead, like the universal Pan ; 
But more exalted, with a brighter train : 
And shall his bounty be dispensed in vain, 
Showered equally on city and on field, 
And neither hope nor steadfast promise yield 
In these usurping times of fear and pain  
Such doom awaits us. Nay, forbid it Heaven ! 
We know the arduous strife, the eternal laws 
To which the triumph of all good is given, 
High sacrifice, and labour without pause, 
Even to the death : — else wherefore should the eye 
Of man converse with immortality  
k  

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

ON THE FINAL SUBMISSION OF THE TYROLESE. 
It was a moral end for which they fought ; 
Else how, when mighty Thrones were put to shame, 
Could they, poor Shepherds, have preserved an aim, 
A resolution, or enlivening thought ? 
Nor hath that moral good been vainly sought ; 
For in their magnanimity and fame 
Powers have they left, an impulse, and a claim 
Which neither can be overturned nor bought. 
Sleep, Warriors, sleep ! among your hills repose ! 
We know that ye, beneath the stern control 
Of awful prudence, keep the unvanquished soul : 
And when, impatient of her guilt and woes, 
Europe breaks forth ; then, Shepherds ! shall ye 
rise 
For perfect triumph o'er your Enemies. 

Hail, Zaragoza! If with unwet eye 
We can approach, thy sorrow to behold, 
Yet is the heart not pitiless nor cold ; 
Such spectacle demands not tear or sigh. 
These desolate remains are trophies high 
Of more than martial courage in the breast 
Of peaceful civic virtue : they attest 
Thy matchless worth to all posterity. 
Blood flowed before thy sight without remorse ; 
Disease consumed thy vitals ; War upheaved 
The ground beneath thee with volcanic force : 
Dread trials ! yet encountered and sustained 
Till not a wreck of help or hope remained, 
And law was from necessity received. 

Say, what is Honour ? — 'Tis the finest sense 
Of justice which the human mind can frame, 
Intent each lurking frailty to disclaim, 
And guard the way of life from all offence 
Suffered or done. When lawless violence 
Invades a Realm, so pressed that in the scale 
Of perilous war her weightiest armies fail, 
Honour is hopeful elevation, — whence 
Glory, and triumph. Yet with politic skill 
Endangered States may yield to terms unjust ; 
Stoop their proud heads, but not unto the dust- 
A Foe's most favourite purpose to fulfil : 
Happy occasions oft by self-mistrust 
Are forfeited ; but infamy doth kill. 

The martial courage of a day is vain, 
An empty noise of death the battle's roar, 
If vital hope be wanting to restore, 
Or fortitude be wanting to sustain, 
Armies or kingdoms. We have heard a strain 
Of triumph, how the labouring Danube bore 
A weight of hostile corses : drenched with gore 
Were the wide fields, the hamlets heaped with slain. 
Yet see (the mighty tumult overpast) 
Austria a Daughter of her Throne hath sold ! 
And her Tyrolean Champion we behold 
Murdered, like one ashore by shipwreck cast, 
Murdered without relief. Oh ! blind as bold, 
To think that such assurance can stand fast ! 

Brave Schill ! by death delivered, take thy flight 
From Prussia's timid region. Go, and rest 
With heroes, 'mid the islands of the Blest, 
Or in the fields of empyrean fight. 
A meteor wert thou crossing a dark night : 
Yet shall thy name, conspicuous and sublime, 
Stand in the spacious firmament of time, 
Fixed as a star : such glory is thy right. 
Alas ! it may not be : for earthly fame 
Is Fortune's frail dependant ; yet there lives 
A Judge, who, as man claims by merit, gives ; 
To whose all-pondering mind a noble aim, 
Faithfully kept, is as a noble deed ; 
In whose pure sight all virtue doth succeed. 

Call not the royal Swede unfortunate, 
Who never did to Fortune bend the knee; 
Who slighted fear ; rejected steadfastly 
Temptation ; and whose kingly name and state 
Have ' perished by his choice, and not his fate ! ' 
Hence fives He, to his inner self endeared ; 
And hence, wherever virtue is revered, 
He sits a more exalted Potentate, 
Throned in the hearts of men. Should Heavei; 
ordain 
That this great Servant of a righteous cause 
Must still have sad or vexing thoughts to endure, 
Yet may a sympathising spirit pause, 
Admonished by these truths, and quench all pam 
In thankful joy and gratulation pure. 

 See Note to Sonnet VII. page ,- 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

Look now on that Adventurer who hath paid 
jHis vows to Fortune ; who, in cruel slight 
I Of virtuous hope, of liberty, and right, 
Hath followed wheresoe'er a way was made 
•By the blind Goddess, — ruthless, undismayed ; 
And so hath gained at length a prosperous height, 
Round which the elements of worldly might 
[Beneath his haughty feet, like clouds, are laid. 
!o joyless power that stands by lawless force ! 
Curses are his dire portion, scorn, and hate, 
Internal darkness and unquiet breath ; 
And, if old judgments keep their sacred course, 
Him from that height shall Heaven precipitate 
By violent and ignominious death. 

Is there a power that can sustain and cheer 
The captive chieftain, by a tyrant's doom, 
Forced to descend into his destined tomb — 
A dungeon dark ! where he must waste the year, 
And lie cut off from all his heart holds dear ; 
What time his injured country is a stage 
Whereon deliberate Valour and the rage 
Df righteous Vengeance side by side appear, 
'Filling from morn to night the heroic scene 
jtVith deeds of hope and everlasting praise : — 
Say can he think of this with mind serene 
'\nd silent fetters ? Yes, if visions bright 
l^bine on his soul, reflected from the days 
Vhen he himself was tried in open light. 

h ! where is Palafox ? Nor tongue nor pen 
Reports of him, his dwelling or his grave ! 
i)oes yet the unheard-of vessel ride the wave \ 
<)v is she swallowed up, remote from ken 
»f pitying human-nature ? Once again 
Rethinks that we shall hail thee, Champion brave, 
jtedeemed to baffle that imperial Slave, 
md through all Europe cheer desponding men 
l Vith new-born hope. Unbounded is the might 
|)f martyrdom, and fortitude, and right, 
jlark, how thy Country triumphs !— Smilingly 
'he Eternal looks upon her sword that gleams, 
jake his own lightning, over mountains high, 
,)n rampart, and the banks of all her streams. 

In due observance of an ancient rite, 
The rude Biscayans, when their children he 
Dead in the sinless time of infancy, 
Attire the peaceful corse in vestments white ; 
And, in like sign of cloudless triumph bright, 
They bind the unoffending creature's brows 
With happy garlands of the pure white rose : 
Then do a festal company unite 
In choral song ; and, while the uplifted cross 
Of Jesus goes before, the child is borne 
Uncovered to his grave : 'tis closed, — her loss 
The Mother then mourns, as she needs must mourn ; 
But soon, through Christian faith, is grief subdued ; 
And joy returns, to brighten fortitude. 

FEELINGS OF A NOBLE BISCAYAN AT ONE OF 
THOSE FUNERALS. 

Yet, yet, Biscayans ! we must meet our Foes 
With firmer soul, yet labour to regain 
Our ancient freedom ; else 'twere worse than vain 
To gather round the bier these festal shows. 
A garland fashioned of the pure white rose 
Becomes not one whose father is a slave : 
Oh, bear the infant covered to his grave  
These venerable mountains now enclose 
A people sunk in apathy and fear. 
If this endure, farewell, for us, all good ! 
The awful light of heavenly innocence 
Will fail to illuminate the infant's bier ; 
And guilt and shame, from which is no defence, 
Descend on all that issues from our blood. 

THE OAK OF GUERNICA. 
The ancient oak of Guernica, says Laborde in his account of Biscay, 
is a most venerable natural monument. Ferdinand and Isabella, in 
the year , after hearing mass in the church of Santa Maria de 
la Antigua, repaired to this tree, under which they swore to the 
Biscayans to maintain their/weros (privileges). What other interest 
belongs to it in the minds of this people will appear from the 
following 
SUPPOSED ADDRESS TO THE SAME. . 
Oak of Guernica ! Tree of holier power 
Than that which in Dodona did enshrine 
(So faith too fondly deemed) a voice divine 
Heard from the depths of its aerial bower — 
How canst thou flourish at this blighting hour ? 
What hope, what joy can sunshine bring to thee, 
Or the soft breezes from the Atlantic sea, 
The dews of morn, or April's tender shower I 
Stroke merciful and welcome would that be 
Which should extend thy branches on the ground, 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

If never more within their shady round 
Those lofty-minded Lawgivers shall meet, 
Peasant and lord, in their appointed seat, 
Guardians of Biscay's ancient liberty. 

INDIGNATION OP A HIGH-MINDED SPANIARD. 
. 
We can endure that He should waste our lands, 
Despoil our temples, and by sword and flame 
Return us to the dust from which we came ; 
Such food a Tyrant's appetite demands : 
And we can brook the thought that by his hands 
Spain may be overpowered, and he possess, 
For his delight, a solemn wilderness 
Where all the brave He dead. But, when of bands 
Which he will break for us he dares to speak, 
Of benefits, and of a future day 
When our enlightened minds shall bless his sway ; 
Then, the strained heart of fortitude proves weak ; 
Our groans, our blushes, our pale cheeks declare 
That he has power to inflict what we lack strength 
to bear. 

Avaunt all specious pliancy of mind 
In men of low degree, all smooth pretence ! 
I better like a blunt indifference, 
And self-respecting slowness, disinclined 
To win me at first sight : and be there joined 
Patience and temperance with this high reserve, 
Honour that knows the path and will not swerve ; 
Affections, which, if put to proof, are kind ; 
And piety towards God. Such men of old 
Were England's native growth ; and, throughout 
Spain, 
(Thanks to high God) forests of such remain : 
Then for that Country let our hopes be bold ; 
For matched with these shall policy prove vain, 
Her arts, her strength, her iron, and her gold. 

. 
O'erweening Statesmen have full long relied 
On fleets and armies, and external wealth : 
But from within proceeds a Nation's health ; 
Which shall not fail, though poor men cleave with 
pride 
To the paternal floor ; or turn aside, 
In the thronged city, from the walks of gain, 
As being all unworthy to detain 
A Soul by contemplation sanctified. 

There are who cannot languish in this strife, 
Spaniards of every rank, by whom the good 
Of such high course was felt and understood ; 
Who to their Country's cause have bound a life 
Erewhile, by solemn consecration, given 
To labour, and to prayer, to nature, and to heaven. 

THE FRENCH AND THE SPANISH GUERILLAS. 
Hunger, and sultry heat, and nipping blast 
From bleak hill-top, and length of march by night 
Through heavy swamp, or over snow-clad height— 
These hardships ill-sustained, these dangers past, 
The roving Spanish Bands are reached at last, 
Charged, and dispersed like foam : but as a flight 
Of scattered quails by signs do reunite, 
So these, — and, heard of once again, are chased 
With combinations of long-practised art 
And newly-kindled hope ; but they are fled — 
Gone are they, viewless as the buried dead : 
Where now? — Their sword is at the Foeman's heart I 
And thus from year to year his walk they thwart, 
And hang like dreams around his guilty bed. 

SPANISH GUERILLAS. 
. 
They seek, are sought ; to daily battle led, 
Shrink not, though far outnumbered by their Foes, 
For they have learnt to open and to close 
The ridges of grim war ; and at their head 
Are captains such as erst their country bred 
Or fostered, self-supported chiefs, — like those 
Whom hardy Rome was fearful to oppose ; 
Whose desperate shock the Carthaginian fled. 
In One who lived unknown a shepherd's life 
Redoubted Viriatus breathes again ; 
And Mina, nourished in the studious shade, 
With that great Leader) vies, who, sick of strife 
And bloodshed, longed in quiet to be laid 
In some green island of the western main. 



XXXII. 
. 
The power of Armies is a visible thing, 
Formal, and circumscribed in time and space ; 
But who the limits of that power shall trace 
Which a brave People into light can bring 

 See Laborde's character of the Spanish people ; from 
him the sentiment of these last two lines is taken. 
t Sertorius. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

; )r hide, at will, — for freedom combating 
y just revenge inflamed  No foot may chase, 
i^o eye can follow, to a fatal place 
."'hat power, that spirit, whether on the wing 
jike the strong wind, or sleeping like the wind 
Vithin its awful caves. — From year to year 
Iprings this indigenous produce far and near : 
\ T o craft this subtle element can bind, 
Using like water from the soil, to find 
n every nook a lip that it may cheer. 

Iere pause : the poet claims at least this praise, 
•'hat virtuous Liberty hath been the scope 
)f his pure song, which did not shrink from hope 
■n the worst moment of these evil days ; 
■rom hope, the paramount duty that Heaven lays, 
^or its own honour, on man's suffering heart, 
iever may from our souls one truth depart — 
i ,'hat an accursed thing it is to gaze 
I >n prosperous tyrants with a dazzled eye ; 
Tor — touched with due abhorrence of their guilt 
'or whose dire ends tears flow, and blood is spilt, 
ind justice labours in extremity — 
'orgst thy weakness, upon which is built, 
! > wretched man, the throne of tyranny ! 

THE FRENCH ARMY IN RUSSIA. 
—. 
Iumanity, delighting to behold 
k fond reflection of her own decay, 
;Iath painted Winter like a traveller old, 
topped on a staff, and, through the sullen day, 
n hooded mantle, limping o'er the plain, 
is though his weakness were disturbed by pain : 
)r, if a juster fancy should allow 
In undisputed symbol of command, 
'he chosen sceptre is a withered bough, 
nfirmly grasped within a palsied hand. 
?hese emblems suit the helpless and forlorn ; 
But mighty Winter the device shall scorn. 
'or he it was — dread Winter ! who beset, 
"linging round van and rear his ghastly net, 
'hat host, when from the regions of the Pole 
i'hey shrunk, insane ambition's barren goal — 
i.'hat host, as huge and strong a,s e'er defied 
'-'heir God, and placed their trust in human pride ! 
jvs fathers persecute rebellious sons, 
le smote the blossoms of their warrior youth ; 

He called on Frost's inexorable tooth 
Life to consume in Manhood's firmest hold ; 
Nor spared the reverend blood that feebly runs ; 
For why — unless for liberty enrolled 
And sacred home — ah ! why should hoary Age be 
bold? 
Fleet the Tartar's reinless steed, 
But fleeter far the pinions of the Wind, 
Which from Siberian caves the Monarch freed, 
And sent him forth, with squadrons of his kind, 
And bade the Snow their ample backs bestride, 
And to the battle ride. 
No pitying voice commands a halt, 
No courage can repel the dire assault ; 
Distracted, spiritless, benumbed, and blind, 
Whole legions sink — and, in one instant, find 
Burial and death : look for them — and descry, 
When morn returns, beneath the clear blue sky, 
A soundless waste, a trackless vacancy ! 

ON THE SAME OCCASION. 
Ye Storms, resound the praises of your King ! 
And ye mild Seasons — in a sunny clime, 
Midway on some high hill, while father Time 
Looks on delighted — meet in festal ring, 
And loud and long of Winter's triumph sing ! 
Sing ye, with blossoms crowned, and fruits, and 
flowers, 
Of Winter's breath surcharged with sleety showers, 
And the dire flapping of his hoary wing ! 
Knit the blithe dance upon the soft green grass ; 
With feet, hands, eyes, looks, lips, report your gain; 
Whisper it to the billows of the main, 
And to the aerial zephyrs as they pass, 
That old decrepit Winter — He hath slain 
That Host, which rendered all your bounties vain ! 

By Moscow self-devoted to a blaze 
Of dreadful sacrifice ; by Russian blood 
Lavished in fight with desperate hardihood ; 
The unfeeling Elements no claim shall raise 
To rob our Human-nature of just praise 
For what she did and suffered. Pledges sure 
Of a deliverance absolute and pure 
She gave, if Faith might tread the beaten ways 
Of Providence. But now did the Most High 
Exalt his still small voice ; — to quell that Host 
Gatliered his power, a manifest aUy ; 
He, whose heaped waves confounded the proud boast 
Of Pharaoh, said to Famine, Snow, and Frost, 
" Finish the strife by deadliest victory ! " 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

THE GERMANS ON THE HEIGHTS OF HOCK HEM 
Abruptly paused the strife ; — the field throughout 
Resting upon his arms each warrior stood, 
Checked in the very act and deed of blood, 
With breath suspended, like a listening scout. 
Silence ! thou wert mother of a shout 
That through the texture of yon azure dome 
Cleaves its glad way, a cry of harvest home 
Uttered to Heaven in ecstasy devout ! [smoke, 
The barrier Rhine hath flashed, through battle- 
On men who gaze heart-smitten by the view, 
As if all Germany had felt the shock ! 
— Fly, wretched Gauls ! ere they the charge renew 
Who have seen — themselves now casting off the 
yoke — 
The unconquerable Stream his course pursue. 

NOVEMBER, . 
Now that all hearts are glad, all faces bright, 
Our aged Sovereign sits, to the ebb and flow 
Of states and kingdoms, to then joy or woe, 
Insensible. He sits deprived of sight, 
And lamentably wrapt in twofold night, 
Whom no weak hopes deceived ; whose mind ensued, 
Through perilous wai", with regal fortitude, 
Peace that should claim respect from lawless Might. 
Dread King of Kings, vouchsafe a ray divine 
To his forlorn condition ! let thy grace 
Upon his inner soul in mercy shine ; 
Permit his heart to kindle, and to embrace 
(Though it were only for a moment's space) 
The triumphs of this hour ; for they are Thine ! 

ODE. 
. 
. Carmina possumus 

Donare, et pretium dicere muneri. 
Non incisa notis marmora publicis, 
Per quas spiritus et vita redit bonis 
Post mortem dueibus 
clarius indicant 
Laudes, quam Pierides; neque, 
Si charts sileant quod bene feceris, 
Mercedem tuleris. Hor. Car. . Lib. . 

When the soft hand of sleep had closed the latch 
On the tired household of corporeal sense, 

And Fancy, keeping unreluctant watch, 
Was free her choicest favours to dispense ; 
I saw, in wondrous perspective displayed, 
A landscape more august than happiest skill 
Of pencil ever clothed with light and shade ; 
An intermingled pomp of vale and hill, 
City, and naval stream, suburban grove, 
And stately forest where the wild deer rove ; 
Nor wanted lurking hamlet, dusky towns, 
And scattered rural farms of aspect bright ; 
And, here and there, between the pastoral dowoa, 
The azure sea upswelled upon the sight. 
Fair prospect, such as Britain only shows ! 
But not a living creature could be seen 
Through its wide circuit, that, in deep repose, 
And, even to sadness, lonely and serene, 
Lay hushed ; till — thi'ough a portal in the sky 
Brighter than brightest loop-hole, in a storm, 
Opening before the sun's triumphant eye — 
Issued, to sudden view, a glorious Form ! 
Earthward it glided with a swift descent : 
Saint George himself this Visitant must be ; 
And, ere a thought could ask on what intent 
He sought the regions of humanity, 
A thrilling voice was heard, that vivified 
City and field and flood ; — aloud it cried — 

" Though from my celestial home, 
" Like a Champion, armed I come ; 
" On my helm the dragon crest, 
" And the red cross on my breast ; 
" I, the Guardian of this Land, 
" Speak not now of toilsome duty ; 
" Well obeyed was that command — 
" Whence bright days of festive beauty ; 
" Haste, Virgins, haste ! — the flowers which sum- 
mer gave 
" Have perished in the field ; 
" But the green thickets plenteously shall yield 
" Fit garlands for the brave, 
" That will be welcome, if by you entwined ; 
" Haste, Virgins, haste ; and you, ye Matrons 
grave, 
" Go forth with rival youthfulness of mind, 
" And gather what ye find 
" Of hardy laurel and wild holly boughs — 
" To deck your stern Defenders' modest brows ! 
" Such simple gifts prepare, 
" Though they have gained a worthier meed ; 
" And in due time shall share 
" Those palms and amaranthine wreaths 
" Unto their martyred Countrymen decreed, 
"In realms where everlasting freshness breathes. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

And lo ! with crimson banners proudly streaming, 
ad upright weapons innocently gleaming, 
long the surface of a spacious plain 
ivance in order the redoubted Bands, 
ad there receive green chaplets from the hands 
Of a fair female train — 
Maids and Matrons, dight 
In robes of dazzling white ; 
I bile from the crowd bursts forth a rapturous noise 
! By the cloud-capt hills retorted ; 
And a throng of rosy boys » 
: In loose fashion tell their joys ; 
ad grey-haired sires, on staffs supported, 
ok round, and by their smiling seem to say, 
ms strives a grateful Country to display 
ie mighty debt which nothing can repay ! 

lAnon before my sight a palace rose 
jiilt of all precious substances, — so pure 
lid exquisite, that sleep alone bestows 
bility like splendour to endure : 
iitered,with streaming thousands, through the gate, 
aw the banquet spread beneath a Dome of state, 
lofty Dome, that dared to emulate 
le heaven of sable night 
:ith starry lustre ; yet had power to throw 
ijlemn effulgence, clear as solar light, 
)on a princely company below, 
ihile the vault rang with choral harmony, 
te some Nymph-haunted grot beneath the roar- 
ing sea. 
o sooner ceased that peal, than on the verge 
exultation hung a dirge 
eathed from a soft and lonely instrument, 
That kindled recollections 
Of agonised affections ; 
d, though some tears the strain attended, 
The mournful passion ended 
peace of spirit, and sublime content ! 

But garlands wither ; festal shows depart, 
<e dreams themselves ; and sweetest sound — 
(Albeit of effect profound) 
It was — and it is gone ! 
storious England ! bid the silent Art 
fleet, in glowing hues that shall not fade, 
ose high achievements ; even as she arrayed 
ith second life the deed of Marathon 
Upon Athenian walls ; 

So may she labour for thy civic halls : 
And be the guardian spaces 
Of consecrated places, 
As nobly graced by Sculpture's patient toil ; 
And let imperishable Columns rise 
Fixed in the depths of this courageous soil ; 
Expressive signals of a glorious strife, 
And competent to shed a spark divine 
Into the torpid breast of daily life ; — 
Records on which, for pleasure of ail eyes, 
The morning sun may shine 
With gratulation thoroughly benign ! 

And ye, Pierian Sisters, sprung from Jove 
And sage Mnemosyne, — full long debarred 
From your first mansions, exiled all too long 
From many a hallowed stream and grove, 
Dear native regions where ye wont to rove, 
Chanting for patriot heroes the reward 
Of never-dying song ! 
Now (for, though Truth descending from above 
The Olympian summit hath destroyed for aye 
Your kindred Deities, Te live and move, 
Spared for obeisance from perpetual love 
For privilege redeemed of godlike sway) 
Now, on the margin of some spotless fountain, 
Or top serene of unmolested mountain, 
Strike audibly the noblest of your lyres, 
And for a moment meet the soul's desires ! 
That I, or some more favoured Bard, may hear 
What ye, celestial Maids ! have often sung 
Of Britain's acts, — may catch it with rapt ear, 
And give the treasure to our British tongue ! 
So shall the characters of that proud page 
Support their mighty theme from age to age ; 
And, in the desert places of the earth, 
When they to future empires have given birth, 
So shall the people gather and believe 
The bold report, transferred to every clime ; 
And the whole world, not envious but admiring, 
And to the like aspiring, 
Own — that the progeny of this fair Isle 
Had power as lofty actions to achieve 
As were performed in man's heroic prime ; 
Nor wanted, when their fortitude had held 
Its even tenor, and the foe was quelled, 
A corresponding virtue to beguile 
The hostile purpose of wide- wasting Time — 
That not in vain they laboured to secure, 
For their great deeds, perpetual memory, 
And fame as largely spread as land and sea, 
By Works of spirit high and passion pure ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

- 

FEELINGS OF A FRENCH ROYALIST, 
on the disinterment op the remains of the ddke 
d'enghien. 
Dear Reliques ! from a pit of vilest mould 
Uprisen — to lodge among ancestral kings ; 
And to inflict shame's salutary stings 
On the remorseless hearts of men grown old 
In a blind worship ; men perversely bold 
Even to this hour, — yet, some shall now forsake 
Their monstrous Idol if the dead e'er spake, 
To warn the living ; if truth were ever told 
By aught redeemed out of the hollow grave : 
murdered Prince ! meek, loyal, pious, brave ! 
The power of retribution once was given : 
But 'tis a rueful thought that willow bands 
So often tie the thunder-wielding hands 
Of Justice sent to earth from highest Heaven ! 

OCCASIONED BY THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO. 
(The last six lines intended for an Inscription.) 
FEBRUARY, . 
Intrepid sons of Albion ! not by you 
Is life despised ; ah no, the spacious earth 
Ne'er saw a race who held, by right of birth, 
So many objects to which love is due : 
Ye slight not life — to God and Nature true ; 
But death, becoming death, is dearer far, 
When duty bids you bleed in open war : 
Hence hath your prowess quelled that impious crew. 
Heroes ! — for instant sacrifice prepared ; 
Yet filled with ardour and on triumph bent 
'Mid direst shocks of mortal accident — 
To you who fell, and you whom slaughter spared 
To guard the fallen, and consummate the event, 
Your Country rears this sacred Monument ! 

SIEGE OF VIENNA RAISED BY JOHN SOBIESKI. 
FEBRUARY, . 
O, for a kindling touch from that pure flame 
Which ministered, erewhile, to a sacrifice 
Of gratitude, beneath Italian slues, 
In words like these : ' Up, Voice of song ! proclaim 
' Thy saintly rapture with celestial aim : 
' For lo ! the Imperial City stands released 
' From bondage threatened by the embattled East, 
' And Christendom respires ; from guilt and shame 
' Redeemed, from miserable fear set free 
' By one day's feat, one mighty victory. 

' — Chant the Deliverer's praise in every tongue ! 
' The cross shall spread, the crescent hath waxed 
dim; 
' He conquering, as in joyful Heaven is sung, 
' He conquering through God, and God by him .' 

OCCASIONED BY THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO. 
FEBRUARY, . 
The Bard — whose soul is meek as dawning day, 
Yet trained to judgments righteously severe, 
Fervid, yet conversant with holy fear, 
As recognising one Almighty sway : 
He — whose experienced eye can pierce the array 
Of past events ; to whom, in vision clear, 
The aspiring heads of future things appear, 
Like mountain-tops whose mists have rolled away— 
Assoiled from all encumbrance of our time f, 
He only, if such breathe, in strains devout 
Shall comprehend this victory sublime ; 
Shall worthily rehearse the hideous rout, 
The triumph hail, which from their peaceful clime 
Angels might welcome with a choral shout ! 

Emperors and Kings, how oft have temples rung 
With impious thanksgiving, the Almighty's scorn! 
How oft above their altars have been hung 
Trophies that led the good and wise to mourn 
Triumphant wrong, battle of battle born, 
And sorrow that to fruitless sorrow clung ! 
Now, from Heaven-sanctioned victory, Peace w 
sprung; 
In this firm hour Salvation lifts her horn. 
Glory to arms ! But, conscious that the nerve 
Of popular reason, long mistrusted, freed 
Your thrones, ye Powers, from duty fear to swerve! 
Be just, be grateful ; nor, the oppressor's erf id 
Reviving, heavier chastisement deserve 
Than ever forced unpitied hearts to bleed. 

XLV. 
ODE. 
. 
I. 
Imagination — ne'er before content, 
But aye ascending, restless in her pride 
From all that martial feats could yield 
To her desires, or to her hopes present — 
 See Filicaia'e Ode. 
t From all this world's encumbrance did himself assort 
— Spenser. 

DEDICATED TO NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND LIBERTY. 

 

'■oped to the Victory, on that Belgic field, 
ihieved, this closing deed magnificent, 
And with the embrace was satisfied. 
— Fly, ministers of Fame, 
Yth every help that ye from earth and heaven 
may claim ! 
I ir through the world these tidings of delight ! 
- lours, Days, and Months, have borne them in 
the sight 
(jmortals, hurrying like a sudden shower 
That land-ward stretches from the sea, 
The morning's splendours to devour ; 
I I this swift travel scorns the company 
( irksome change, or threats from saddening 
power. 
— The shock is given — the Adversaries bleed — 
. Lo, Justice triumphs ! Earth is freed ! 
J : ful annunciation ! — it went forth — 
I lierced the caverns of the sluggish North — 
It found no barrier on the ridge 
CAndes — frozen gulphs became its bridge — 
Is vast Pacific gladdens with the freight — 
Ipn the Lakes of Asia 'tis bestowed — 
Is Arabian desart shapes a willing road 
Across her burning breast, 
F this refreshing incense from the West ! — 
— Where snakes and lions breed, 
V ere towns and cities thick as stars appear, 
"Vierever fruits are gathered, and where'er 
T:> upturned soil receives the hopeful seed — 
V ilethe Sun rules, and cross the shades of night — 
T t unwearied arrow hath pursued its flight ! 
Ti eyes of good men thankfully give heed, 
And in its sparkling progress read 
e crowned with glory's deathless meed : 
T ants exult to hear of kingdoms won, 
A  slaves are pleased to learn that mighty feats 
are done ; 
■n the proud Realm, from whose distracted 
borders 
T  messenger of good was launched in air, 
F nee, humbled France, amid her wild disorders, 
I Is, and hereafter shall the truth declare, 
T-.t she too lacks not reason to rejoice, 
Mutter England'sname with sadly-plausive voice. 

C enuine glory, pure renown ! 
  well might it beseem that mighty Town 
I ) whose bosom earth's best treasures flow, 
' whom all persecuted men retreat ; 
L new Temple lift her votive brow 
I ;h on the shore of silver Thames — to greet 

The peaceful guest advancing from afar. 
Bright be the Fabric, as a star 
Fresh risen, and beautiful within ! — there meet 
Dependence infinite, proportion just ; 
A Pile that Grace approves, and Time can trust 
With his most sacred wealth, heroic dust. 

But if the valiant of this land 
In reverential modesty demand, 
That all observance, due to them, be paid 
Where their serene progenitors are laid ; 
Kings, warriors, high-souled poets, saint-like sages, 
England's illustrious sons of long, long ages ; 
Be it not unordained that solemn rites, 
Within the circuit of those Gothic walls, 
Shall be performed at pregnant intervals ; 
Commemoration holy that unites 
The living generations with the dead ; 
By the deep soul-moving sense 
Of religious eloquence, — 
By visual pomp, and by the tie 
Of sweet and threatening harmony ; 
Soft notes, awful as the omen 
Of destructive tempests coming, 
And escaping from that sadness 
Into elevated gladness ; 
While the white-rob'd choir attendant, 
Under mouldering banners pendant, 
Provoke all potent symphonies to raise 
Songs of victory and praise, 
For them who bravely stood unhurt, or bled 
With medicable wounds, or found their graves 
Upon the battle field, or under ocean's waves ; 
Or were conducted home in single state, 
And long procession — there to he, 
Where their sons' sons, and all posterity, 
Unheard by them, then.' deeds shall celebrate ! 

Nor will the God of peace and love 
Such martial service disapprove. 
He guides the Pestilence — the cloud 
Of locusts travels on his breath ; 
The region that in hope was ploughed 
His drought consumes, his mildew taints with death ; 
He springs the hushed Volcano's mine, 
He puts the Earthquake on her still design, 
Darkens the sun, hath bade the forest sink, 
And, drinking towns and cities, stiU can drink 
Cities and towns — 'tis Thou — the work is Thine ! — 
The fierce Tornado sleeps within thy courts — 
He hears the word — he flies — 
And navies perish in their ports ; 

 


POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

For Thou art angry with thine enemies ! 
For these, and mourning for our errors, 
And sins, that point their terrors, 
We bow our heads before Thee, and we laud 
And magnify thy name, Almighty God ! 
But Man is thy most awful instrument, 
In working out a pure intent ; 
Thou cloth'st the wicked in their dazzling mail, 
And for thy righteous purpose they prevail ; 
Thine arm from peril guards the coasts 
Of them who in thy laws delight : 
Thy presence turns the scale of doubtful fight, 
Tremendous God of battles, Lord of Hosts ! 

Forbear : — to Thee — 
Father and Judge of all, with fervent tongue 
But in a gentler strain 
Of contemplation, by no sense of wrong, 
(Too quick and keen) incited to disdain 
Of pity pleading from the heart in vain — 
To Thee— To Thee 
Just God of christianised Humanity 
Shall praises be poured forth, and thanks ascend, 
That thou hast brought our warfare to an end, 
And that we need no second victory ! 
Blest, above measure blest, 
If on thy love our Land her hopes shall rest, 
And all the Nations labour to fulfil 
Thy law, and live henceforth in peace, in pure 
good will. 

ODE. 

THE MORNING OF THE DAT APPOINTED FOR A GENERAL 
THANKSGIVING. JANUARY , . 

Hail, orient Conqueror of gloomy Night ! 
Thou that canst shed the bliss of gratitude 
On hearts howe'er insensible or rude ; 
Whether thy punctual visitations smite 
The haughty towers where monarchs dwell ; 
Or thou, impartial Sun, with presence bright 
Cheer'st the low threshold of the peasant's cell ! 
Not unrejoiced I see thee climb the sly 
In naked splendour, clear from mist or haze, 
Or cloud approaching to divert the rays, 
Which even in deepest winter testify 
Thy power and majesty, 
Dazzling the vision that presumes to gaze. 
— Well does thine aspect usher in this Day ; 

As aptly suits therewith that modest pace 
Submitted to the chains 
That bind thee to the path which God ordains 
That thou shalt trace, 
Till, with the heavens and earth, thou pass awav ' 
Nor less, the stillness of these frosty plains, 
Their utter stillness, and the silent grace 
Of yon ethereal summits white with snow, 
(Whose tranquil pomp and spotless purity 
Report of storms gone by 
To us who tread below) 
Do with the service of this Day accord. 
— Divinest Object which the uplifted eye 
Of mortal man i suffered to behold ; [pture' 
Thou, who upon those snow-clad Heights ha 
Meek lustre, nor forget'st the humble Vale ; 
Thou who dost warm Earth's universal mould, 
And for thy bounty wert not unadored 
By pious men of old ; 
Once more, heart-cheering Sun, I bid thee hail ! 
Bright be thy course to-day, let not this promise fciii 



'Mid the deep quiet of this morning hour, 
All nature seems to hear me while I speak, 
By feelings urged that do not vainly seek 
Apt language, ready as the tuneful notes 
That stream in blithe succession from the throat  
Of birds, in leafy bower, 
Warbling a farewell to a vernal shower. 
— There is a radiant though a short-lived flame, 
That burns for Poets in the dawning east ; 
And oft my soul hath kindled at the same, 
When the captivity of sleep had ceased ; 
But He who fixed immoveably the frame 
Of the round world, and built, by laws as strong, 
A solid refuge for distress — 
The towers of righteousness ; 
He knows that from a holier altar came 
The quickening spark of this day's sacrifice ; 
Knows that the source is nobler whence doth ri- 
The current of this matin song ; 
That deeper far it lies 
Than aught dependent on the fickle skies. 

Have we not conquered ? — by the vengeful rtrw 
Ah no, by dint of Magnanimity ; 
That curbed the baser passions, and left free 
A loyal band to follow their liege Lord 
Clear-sighted Honour, and his staid Compeers, 
Along a track of most unnatural years ; 
In execution of heroic deeds 
Whose memory, spotless as the crystal beads 

THANKSGIVING ODE. 

 

morning dew upon the untrodden meads, 
all live enrolled above the starry spheres. 
, who in concert with an earthly string 
Of Britain's acts would sing, 
He with enraptured voice will tell 
■ One whose spirit no reverse could quell ; 
■ One that mid the failing never failed — 
' ho paints how Britain struggled and prevailed 
,' all represent her labouring 'with an eye 
Of circumspect humanity ; 
;;all show her clothed with strength and skill, 
All martial duties to fulfil ; 
] -m as a rock in stationary fight ; 
] motion rapid as the lightning's gleam ; 
hrce as a flood-gate bursting at mid night 
rouse the wicked from their giddy dream — 
')e, woe to all that face her in the field ! 
I palled she may not be, and cannot yield. 

And thus is missed the sole true glory 
That can belong to human story ! 
At which they only shall arrive 
Who through the abyss of weakness dive. 
 i very humblest are too proud of heart ; 
 one brief day is rightly set apart 
L' Him who lifteth up and layeth low ; 
I' that Almighty God to whom we owe, 
£' not that we have vanquished — but that we 
survive. 

ow dreadful the dominion of the impure ! 
fcy should the Song be tardy to proclaim 
-'at less than power unbounded could not tame 
jbt soul of Evil — which, from hell let loose, 
 d filled the astonished world with such abuse 
- boundless patience only could endure ? 
- Vide- wasted regions — cities wrapt in flame — 
  sees, may lift a streaming eye 
■> Heaven ; — who never saw, may heave a sigh ; 
J t the foundation of our nature shakes, 
i|d with an infinite pain the spirit aches, 
A ten desolated countries, towns on fire, 
Are but the avowed attire 
I warfare waged with desperate mind 
•ainst the life of virtue in mankind ; 
Assaulting without ruth 
The citadels of truth ; 
^lile the fair gardens of civility, 
By ignorance defaced, 
By violence laid waste, 
Irish without reprieve for flower or tree ! 

A crouching purpose — a distracted will — 
Opposed to hopes that battened upon scorn, 
And to desires whose ever- waxing horn 
Not all the light of earthly power could fill ; 
Opposed to dark, deep plots of patient skill, 
And to celerities of lawless force ; 
Which, spurning God, had flung away remorse — 
What could they gain but shadows of redress ? 
— So bad proceeded propagating worse ; 
And discipline was passion's dire excess. 
Widens the fatal web, its fines extend, 
And deadlier poisons in the chalice blend. 
When will your trials teach you to be wise ? 
— prostrate Lands, consult your agonies ! 

No more — the guilt is banish'd, 
And, with the guilt, the shame is fled ; 
And, with the guilt and shame, the Woe hath 
vanish'd, 
Shaking the dust and ashes from her head ! 
— No more — these fingerings of distress 
Sully the limpid stream of thankfulness. 
What robe can Gratitude employ 
So seemly as the radiant vest of Joy ? 
What steps so suitable as those that move 
In prompt obedience to spontaneous measures 
Of glory, and felicity, and love, 
Surrendering the whole heart to sacred pleasures ? 

Britain ! dearer far than life is dear, 
If one there be 
Of all thy progeny 
Who can forget thy prowess, never more 
Be that ungrateful Son allowed to hear 
Thy green leaves rustle or thy torrents roar. 
As springs the lion from his den, 
As from a forest-brake 
Upstarts a glistering snake, 
The bold Arch-despot re-appeared ; — again 
Wide Europe heaves, impatient to be cast, 
With all her armed Powers, 
On that offensive soil, bike waves upon a 
thousand shores. 
The trumpet blew a universal blast ! 
But Thou art foremost in the field : — there stand : 
Receive the triumph destined to thy hand ! 
All States have glorified themselves ; — their claims 
Are weighed by Providence, in balance even ; 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

And now, in preference to the mightiest names, 
To Thee the exterminating sword is given. 
Dread mark of approbation, justly gained ! 
Exalted office, worthily sustained ! 

Preserve, Lord ! within our hearts 
The memory of thy favour, 
That else insensibly departs, 
And loses its sweet savour ! 
Lodge it within us ! — as the power of light 
Lives inexhaustibly in precious gems, 
Fixed on the front of Eastern diadems, 
So shine our thankfulness for ever bright ! 
What offering, what transcendent monument 
Shall our sincerity to Thee present ? 
— Not work of hands; but trophies that may 
reach 
To highest Heaven — the labour of the Soul ; 
That builds, as thy unerring precepts teach, 
Upon the internal conquests made by each, 
Her hope of lasting glory for the whole. 
Yet will not heaven disown nor earth gainsay 
The outward service of this day ; 
Whether the worshippers entreat 
Forgiveness from God's mercy-seat ; 
Or thanks and praises to His throne ascend 
That He has brought our warfare to an end, 
And that we need no second victory ! 
Ha ! what a ghastly sight for man to see ; 
And to the heavenly saints in peace who dwell, 
For a brief moment, terrible ; 
But, to thy sovereign penetration, fair, 
Before whom all things are, that were, 
All judgments that have been, or e'er shall be ; 
Links in the chain of thy tranquillity ! 
Along the bosom of this favoured Nation, 
Breathe Thou, this day, a vital undulation ! 
Let all who do this land inherit 
Be conscious of thy moving spirit ! 
Oh, 'tis a goodly Ordinance, — the sight, 
Though sprung from bleeding war, is one of pure 
delight ; 
Bless Thou the hour, or ere the hour arrive, 
When a whole people shall kneel down in prayer, 
And, at one moment, in one rapture, strive 
With lip and heart to tell their gratitude 
For thy protecting care, 

Their solemn joy — praising the Eternal Lord 
For tyranny subdued, 
And for the sway of equity renewed, 
For liberty confirmed, and peace restored ! 

But hark — the summons ! — down the placid lak. 
Floats the soft cadence of the church-tower bells ; 
Bright shines the Sun, as if his beams would wak 
The tender insects sleeping in their cells ; 
Bright shines the Sun — and not a breeze to shak 
The drops that tip the melting icicles. 
, enter now his temple gate ! 
Inviting words — perchance already flung 
(As the crowd press devoutly down the aisle 
Of some old Minster's venerable pile) 
From voices into zealous passion stung, 
While the tubed engine feels the inspiring blast, 
And has begun — its clouds of sound to cast 
Forth towards empyreal Heaven, ' 
As if the fretted roof were riven. 
Us, humbler ceremonies now await ; 
But in the bosom, with devout respect 
The banner of our joy we will erect, 
And strength of love our souls shall elevate : 
For to a few collected in his name, 
Their heavenly Father will incline an ear 
Gracious to service hallowed by its aim ; — 
Awake ! the majesty of God revere ! 
Go — and with foreheads meekly bowed 
Present your prayers — go — and rejoice aloud— 
The Holy One will hear ! 
And what, 'mid silence deep, with faith sincere, 
Ye, in your low and undisturbed estate, 
Shall simply feel and purely meditate — 
•Of warnings — from the unprecedented might, 
Which, in our time, the impious have disclosed ; 
And of more arduous duties thence imposed 
Upon the future advocates of right ; 
Of mysteries revealed, 
And judgments unrepealed, 
Of earthly revolution, 
And final retribution, — 
To his omniscience will appear 
An offering not unworthy to find place, 
On this high Day of Thanks, before the Thro 
of Grace ! 


MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 
. 

DEDICATION. 
(sent with these POEMS, IN MS., TO ). 

)ear Fellow-travellers ! think not that the Muse, 
'o You presenting these memorial Lays, 
lan hope the general eye thereon would gaze, 
lS on a mirror that gives back the hues 
;>f living Nature ; no — though free to choose 
.'he greenest bowers, the most inviting ways, 
i'he fairest landscapes and the brightest days— 
Rvdal Mount, Nov. . 

FISH-WOMEN. — ON LANDING AT CALAIS. 
' s said, fantastic ocean doth enfold 
'.ie likeness of whate'er on land is seen ; 
It, if the Nereid Sisters and their Queen, 
.|ove whose heads the tide so long hath rolled, 
Ie Dames resemble whom we here behold, 
l|w fearful were it down through opening waves 
 sink, and meet them in their fretted caves, 
 thered, grotesque, immeasurably old, 
j,& shrill and fierce in accent ! — Fear it not : 
lie they Earth's fairest daughters do excel ; 
Ire undecaying beauty is their lot ; 
Oeir voices into liquid music swell, 
'rilling each pearly cleft and sparry grot, 
'■  undisturbed abodes where Sea-nymphs dwell ! 

BRUGES. 
Iuges I saw attired with golden light 
( reamed from the west) as with a robe of power : 
' e splendour fled ; and now the sunless hour, 
r at, slowly making way for peaceful night, 
nt suits with fallen grandeur, to my sight 
< era the beauty, the magnificence, 
Id sober graces, left her for defence 
' ainst the injuries of time, the spite 
< fortune, and the desolating storms 
•ifuture war. Advance not — spare to hide, 
gentle Power of darkness ! these mild hues ; 
< scure not yet these silent avenues 
 stateliest architecture, where the Forms 
(.nun-like females, with soft motion, glide ! 

Her skill she tried with less ambitious views. 
For You she wrought : Ye only can supply 
The life, the truth, the beauty : she confides 
In that enjoyment which with You abides, 
Trusts to your love and vivid memory ; 
Thus far contented, that for You her verse 
Shall lack not power the ' meeting soul to pierce ! ' 
W. WORDSWORTH. 

The Spirit of Antiquity — enshrined 
In sumptuous buildings, vocal in sweet song, 
In picture, speaking with heroic tongue, 
And with devout solemnities entwined — 
Mounts to the seat of grace within the mind : 
Hence Forms that glide with swan-like ease along, 
Hence motions, even amid the vulgar throng, 
To an harmonious decency confined : 
As if the streets were consecrated ground, 
The city one vast temple, dedicate 
To mutual respect in thought and deed ; 
To leisure, to forbearances sedate ; 
To social cares from jarring passions freed ; 
A deeper peace than that in deserts found ! 

INCIDENT AT BRUGES. 
In Bruges town is many a street 
Whence busy life hath fled ; 
Where, without hurry, noiseless feet, 
The grass-grown pavement tread. 
There heard we, halting in the shade 
Flung from a Convent-tower, 
A harp that tuneful prelude made 
To a voice of thrilling power. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

The measure, simple truth to tell, 
Was fit for some gay throng ; 
Though from the same grim turret fell 
The shadow and the song. 
When silent were both voice and chords, 
The strain seemed doubly dear, 
Yet sad as sweet, — for English words 
Had fallen upon the ear. 
It was a breezy hour of eve ; 
And pinnacle and spire v 
Quivered and seemed almost to heave, 
Clothed with innocuous fire ; 
But, where we stood, the setting sun 
Showed little of his state ; 
And, if the glory reached the Nun, 
'Twas through an iron grate. 
Not always is the heart unwise, 
Nor pity idly born, 
If even a passing Stranger sighs 
For them who do not mourn. 
Sad is thy doom, self-solaced dove, 
Captive, whoe'er thou be ! 
Oh ! what is beauty, what is love, 
And opening fife to thee ? 
Such feeling pressed upon my soul, 
A feeling sanctified 
By one soft trickling tear that stole 
From the Maiden at my side ; 
Less tribute could she pay than this, 
Borne gaily o'er the sea, 
Fresh from the beauty and the bliss 
Of English liberty ? 

AFTER VISITING THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 
A winged Goddess — clothed in vesture wrought 
Of rainbow colours ; One whose port was bold, 
Whose overburthened hand could scarcely hold 
The glittering crowns and garlands which 
brought — 
Hovered in air above the far-famed Spot. 
She vanished ; leaving prospect blank and cold 
Of wind-swept corn that wide around us rolled 
In dreary billows, wood, and meagre cot, 
And monuments that soon must disappear : 
Yet a dread local recompence we found ; 
While glory seemed betrayed, while patriot-zeal 
Sank in our hearts, we felt as men should feel 
With such vast hoards of hidden carnage near, 
And horror breathing from the silent ground ! 

it 

BETWEEN NAMUR AND LIEGE. 
What lovelier home could gentle Fancy choose! 
Is this the stream, whose cities, heights, and plains, 
War's favourite playground, are with crimson stains 
Familiar, as the Morn with pearly dews  
The Morn, that now, along the silver Mecse, 
Spreading her peaceful ensigns, calls the swains 
To tend their silent boats and ringing wains, 
Or strip the bough whose mellow fruit bestrews 
The ripening com beneath it. As mine eyes 
Turn from the fortified and threatening hill, 
How sweet the prospect of yon watery glade, 
With its grey rocks clustering in pensive shade — 
That, shaped like old monastic turrets, rise 
From the smooth meadow-ground, serene and still ! 
VII. 
AIX-LA-CHAPELLE. 
Was it to disenchant, and to undo, 
That we approached the Seat of Charlemaine? 
To sweep from many an old romantic strain 
That faith which no devotion may renew ! 
Why does this puny Church present to view 
Her feeble columns ? and that scanty chair ! 
This sword that one of our weak times might wear i 
Objects of false pretence, or meanly true ! 
If from a traveller's fortune I might claim 
A palpable memorial of that day, 
Then would I seek the Pyrenean Breach 
That Roland clove with huge two-handed sway, 
And to the enormous labour left his name, 
Where unremitting frosts the rocky crescent bleach 

IN THE CATHEDRAL AT COLOGNE. 
for the help of Angels to complete 
This Temple — Angels governed by a plan 
Thus far pursued (how gloriously !) by Man, 
Studious that He might not disdain the seat 
Who dwells in heaven ! But that aspiring heat 
Hath failed ; and now, ye Powers ! whose gorgeou 
wings 
And splendid aspect yon emblazonings 
But faintly picture, 'twere an office meet 
For you, on these unfinished shafts to try 
The midnight virtues of your harmony : — 
This vast design might tempt you to repeat 
Strains that call forth upon empyreal ground 
Immortal Fabrics, rising to the sound 
Of penetrating harps and voices sweet ! 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

N A CARRIAGE, UPON THE BANKS OF THE RHINE. 
Amid this dance of objects sadness steals 
i'er the defrauded heart — while sweeping by, 
As in a fit of Thespian jollity, 
Beneath her vine-leaf crown the green Earth reels : 
Backward, in rapid evanescence, wheels 
The venerable pageantry of Time, 
Each beetling rampart, and each tower sublime, 
A.nd what the Dell unwillingly reveals 
Df lurking cloistral arch, through trees espied 
^ear the bright River's edge. Yet why repine  
To muse, to creep, to halt at will, to gaze — 
such sweet way-faring — of life's spring the pride, 
Her summer's faithful joy — that still is mine, 
And in fit measure cheers autumnal days. 

HYMN, 
i.'OR THE BOATMEN, AS THEY APPROACH THE RAP 
UNDER THE CASTLE OF HEIDELBERG. 
Jesu ! bless our slender Boat, 
By the current swept along ; 
Loud its threatenings — let them not 
Drown the music of a song 
Breathed thy mercy to implore, 
Where these troubled waters roar ! 
Saviour, for our warning, seen 
Bleeding on that precious Rood ; 
If, while through the meadows green 
Gently wound the peaceful flood, 
We forgot Thee, do not Thou 
Disregard thy Suppliants now ! 
Hither, like yon ancient Tower 
Watching o'er the River's bed, 
Fling the shadow of thy power, 
Else we sleep among the dead ; 
Thou who trod'st the billowy sea, 
Shield us in our jeopardy ! 
Guide our Bark among the waves ; 
Through the rocks our passage smooth ; 
Where the whirlpool frets and raves 
Let thy love its anger soothe : 
All our hope is placed in Thee ; 
Miserere Domine ! 
 See Note. 

THE SOURCE OF THE DANUBE. 
Not, like his great Compeers, indignantly 
Doth Danube spring to fife ! The wandering 
Stream 
(Who loves the Cross, yet to the Crescent's gleam 
Unfolds a willing breast) with infant glee 
Slips from his prison walls : and Fancy, free 
To follow in his track of silver light, 
Mounts on rapt wing, and with a moment's flight 
Hath reached the encincture of that gloomy sea 
Whose waves the Orphean lyre forbad to meet 
In conflict ; whose rough winds forgot their jars 
To waft the heroic progeny of Greece ; 
When the first Ship sailed for the Golden Fleece — 
Argo — exalted for that daring feat 
To fix in heaven her shape distinct with stars. 

ON APPROACHING THE STAUB-BACH, LAUTERBRUNNEN. 
Uttered by whom, or how inspired^-designed 
For what strange service, does this concert reach 
Our ears, and near the dwellings of mankind ! 
Mid fields familiarized to human speech ? — 
No Mermaids warble — to allay the wind 
Driving some vessel toward a dangerous beach — 
More thrilling melodies ; Witch answering Witch, 
To chant a love-spell, never intertwined 
Notes shrill and wild with art more musical : 
Alas ! that from the lips of abject Want 
Or Idleness in tatters mendicant 
The strain should flow— free Fancy to enthral, 
And with regret and useless pity haunt 
This bold, this bright, this sky-born, Waterfall ! 

THE FALL OF THE AAR HANDEC. 
From the fierce aspect of this River, throwing 
His giant body o'er the steep rock's brink, 
Back in astonishment and fear we shrink : 
But, gradually a calmer look bestowing, 
Flowers we espy beside the torrent growing ; 
Flowers that peep forth from many a cleft and 
chink, 
And, from the whirlwind of his anger, drink 
Hues ever fresh, in rocky fortress blowing : 
They suck — from breath that, threatening to 
destroy, 

 See Note. 

t See Note. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Is more benignant than the dewy eve — 

I love, where spreads the village lawn, 

Beauty, and life, and motions as of joy : 

Upon some knee- worn cell to gaze : 

Nor doubt but He to whom yon Pine-trees nod 

Hail to the firm unmoving cross, 

Their heads in sign of worship, Nature's God, 

Aloft, where pines their branches toss ! 

These humbler adorations will receive. 

And to the chapel far withdrawn, 


That lurks by lonely ways ! 
Where'er we roam — along the brink 



Of Rhine — or by the sweeping Po, 


Through Alpine vale, or champain wide, 

XIV. 

Whate'er we look on, at our side 

MEMORIAL, 

Be Charity ! — to bid us think, 


And feel, if we would know. 

NEAB THE OUTLET OF THE LAKE OF THDN. 


'DEM 


ANDENKEN 


MEINES FREVNDES 


AZOYS BEDING 


MDCCCXriU.' 

XVI. 

Aloys Reding, it will be remembered, was Captain- 

AFTER-THOUGHT. 

General of the Swiss forces, which, with a courage 


and perseverance worthy of the cause, opposed the 

Oh Life ! without thy chequered scene 

flagitious and too successful attempt of Buonaparte 

Of right and wrong, of weal and woe, 

to subjugate their country. 

Success and failure, could a ground 

Around a wild and woody hill 

For magnanimity be found ; 

A gravelled pathway treading, 

For faith, 'mid ruined hopes, serene ? 

We reached a votive Stone that bears 

Or whence could virtue flow ? 

The name of Aloys Reding. 

Pain entered through a ghastly breach — 


Nor while sin lasts must effort cease ; 

Well judged the Friend who placed it there 
For silence and protection ; 

Heaven upon earth 's an empty boast ; 

But, for the bowers of Eden lost, 

And haply with a finer care 
Of dutiful affection. 


Mercy has placed within our reach 


A portion of God's peace. 

The Sun regards it from the West ; 


And, while in summer glory 


He sets, his sinking yields a type 


Of that pathetic story : 

XVII. 


SCENE ON THE LAKE OF BRIENTZ. 

And oft he tempts the patriot Swiss 

' What know we of the Blest above 

Amid the grove to linger ; 

But that they sing and that they love ?' 

Till all is dim, save this bright Stone 

Yet, if they ever did inspire 

Touched by his golden finger. 

A mortal hymn, or shaped the choir, 


Now, where those harvest Damsels float 


Homeward in their rugged Boat, 
(While all the ruffling winds are fled — 



Each slumbering on some mountain' s head) 

XV. 

Now, surely, hath that gracious aid 


Been felt, that influence is displayed. 

COMPOSED IN ONE OF THE CATHOLIC CANTONS. 


Pupils of Heaven, in order stand 

Doomed as we are our native dust 

The rustic Maidens, every hand 

To wet with many a bitter shower, 

Upon a Sister's shoulder laid, — 

It ill befits us to disdain 

To chant, as glides the boat along, 

The altar, to deride the fane, 

A simple, but a touching, song ; 

Where simple Sufferers bend, in trust 

To chant, as Angels do above, 

To win a happier hour. 

The melodies of Peace in love ! 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

ENGELBERG, THE HILL OF ANGELS. 
For gentlest uses, oft-times Nature takes 
I The work of Fancy from her willing hands ; 
And such a beautiful creation makes 
As renders needless spells and magic wands, 
And for the boldest tale belief commands. 
SVhen first mine eyes beheld that famous Hill 
The sacred Engelberg, celestial Bands, 
With intermingling motions soft and still, 
Jung round its top, on wings that changed their 
hues at will. 
Olouds do not name those Visitants ; they were 
Che very Angels whose authentic lays, 
'ung from that heavenly ground in middle air, 
tfade known the spot where piety should raise 
i. holy Structure to the Almighty's praise. 
Resplendent Apparition ! if in vain 
,ily ears did listen, 'twas enough to gaze ; 
iind watch the slow departure of the train, 
Vhose skirts the glowing Mountain thirsted to 
detain. 

OUR LADY OF THE SNOW. 
Meek Virgin Mother, more benign 
Than fairest Star, upon the height 
Of thy own mountain f, set to keep 
Lone vigils through the hours of sleep, 
What eye can look upon thy shrine 
Untroubled at the sight ? 
These crowded offerings as they hang 
In sign of misery relieved, 
Even these, without intent of theirs, 
Report of comfortless despairs, 
Of many a deep and cureless pang 
And confidence deceived. 
To Thee, in this aerial cleft, 
As to a common centre, tend 
All sufferers that no more rely 
On mortal succour — all who sigh 
And pine, of human hope bereft, 
Nor wish for earthly friend. 

 See Note. 

t Mount Righi. 

And hence, Virgin Mother mild ! 
Though plenteous flowers around thee blow, 
Not only from the dreary strife 
Of Winter, but the storms of life, 
Thee have thy Votaries aptly styled, 
Our Lady of the Snow. 
Even for the Man who stops not here, 
But down the irriguous valley hies, 
Thy very name, Lady ! flings, 
O'er blooming fields and gushing springs 
A tender sense of shadowy fear, 
And chastening sympathies ! 
Nor falls that intermingling shade 
To summer-gladsomeness unkind : 
It chastens only to requite 
With gleams of fresher, purer, light ; 
While, o'er the flower-enamelled glade, 
More sweetly breathes the wind. 
But on ! — a tempting downward way, 
A verdant path before us lies ; 
Clear shines the glorious sun above ; 
Then give free course to joy and love, 
Deeming the evil of the day 
Sufficient for the wise. 

EFFUSION, 
IN PKESENCE OF THE PAINTED TOWER OF TELL, 
AT ALTORF. 
This Tower stands upon the spot where grew the Linden 
Tree against which his Son is said to have been placed, 
when the Father's archery was put to proof under cir- 
cumstances so famous in Swiss Story. 
What though the Italian pencil wrought not here, 
Nor such fine skill as did the meed bestow 
On Marathonian valour, yet the tear 
Springs forth in presence of this gaudy show, 
While narrow cares their limits overflow. 
Thrice happy, burghers, peasants, warriors old, 
Infants in arms, and ye, that as ye go 
Home-ward or school-ward, ape what ye behold ; 
Heroes before your time, in frolic fancy bold ! 
And when that calm Spectatress from on high 
Looks down — the bright and solitary Moon, 
Who never gazes but to beautify ; 
And snow-fed torrents, which the blaze of noon 
Roused into fury, murmur a soft tune 
That fosters peace, and gentleness recals ; 
s 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

Tlien might the passing Monk receive a hoon 
Of saintly pleasure from these pictured walls, 
While, on the warlike groups, the mellowing lustre 
falls. 
How hlest the souls who when their trials come 
Yield not to terror or despondency, 
But face like that sweet Boy their mortal doom, 
Whose head the ruddy apple tops, while he 
Expectant stands beneath the linden tree : 
He quakes not like the timid forest game, 
But smiles — the hesitating shaft to free ; 
Assured that Heaven its justice will proclaim, 
And to his Father give its own unerring aim. 

THE TOWN OF SCHWYTZ. 
By antique Fancy trimmed — though lowly, bred 
To dignity — in thee, O Schwytz ! are seen 
The genuine features of the golden mean ; 
Equality by Prudence governed, 
Or jealous Nature ruling in her stead ; 
And, therefore, art thou blest with peace, serene 
As that of the sweet fields and meadows green 
In unambitious compass round thee spread. 
Majestic Berne, high on her guardian steep, 
Holding a central station of command, 
Might well be styled this noble body's Head ; 
Thou, lodged 'mid mountainous entrenchments deep, 
Its Heart ; and ever may the heroic Land 
Thy name, O Schwytz, in happy freedom keep ! 

ON HEARING THE " RANZ DES VACHES " ON THE TOP 
OF THE PASS OF ST. GOTHARD. 
I listen — but no faculty of mine 
Avails those modulations to detect, 
Which, heard in foreign lands, the Swiss affect 
With tenderest passion ; leaving him to pine 
(So fame reports) and die, — his sweet-breath'd 
kine 
Remembering, and green Alpine pastures decked 
With vernal flowers. Yet may we not reject 
The tale as fabulous. — Here while I recline, 
Mindful how others by this simple Strain 

 Nearly  years (says Ebel, speaking of the French 
Invasion,) had elapsed, when, for the first time, foreign 
soldiers were seen upon the frontiers of this small Canton, 
to impose upon it the laws of their governors. 

Are moved, for me — upon this Mountain named 
Of God himself from dread pre-eminence — 
Aspiring thoughts, by memory reclaimed, 
Yield to the Music's touching influence ; 
And joys of distant home my heart enchain. 

FORT FUENTES. 

The Ruins of Fort Fuentes form the crest of a rock; 
eminence that rises from the plain at the head of the lak 
of Como, commanding views up the Valteline, and towan 
the town of Chiavenna. The prospect in the latter directioi 
is characterised by melancholy sublimity. We rejoice 
at being favoured with a distinct view of those Alpin 
heights ; not, as we had expected from the breaking up o 
the storm, steeped in celestial glory, yet in communioi 
wi th clouds floating or stationary — scatterings from heaver 
The Ruin is interesting hoth in mass and in detiiil. Ai 
Inscription, upon elaborately-sculptured marhle lying  
the ground, records that the Fort had been erected b 
Count Fuentes in the year (, during the reign of Phili 
the Third; and the Chapel, about twenty years after, b 
one of his Descendants. Marble pillars of gateway! &r 
yet standing, and a considerable part of the Chapel walls 
a smooth green turf has taken place of the pavement, an 
we could see no trace of altar or image ; hut evcrywher, 
something to remind one of former splendour, and ( 
devastation and tumult. In our ascent we had passei 
abundance of wild vines intermingled with bushes : ne« 
the ruins were some ill tended, but growing willingly 
and rock, turf, and fragments of the pile, are alike coverc 
or adorned with a variety of flowers, among which tl 
rose-coloured pink was growing in great beauty. Wlii! 
descending, we discovered on the ground, apart from tl 
path, and at a considerable distancefrom the ruined Chape 
a statue of a Child in pure white marhle, uninjured by tl 
explosion that had driven it so far down the hill. "Ho 
little," we exclaimed, "are these things valued hen 
Could we hut transport this pretty Image to our on 
garden ! " — Yet it seemed it would have been a pity any oi 
should remove it from its couch in the wilderness, wbk 
may be its own for hundreds of years.— Extract /n 
Journal. 
Dread hour ! when, upheaved by war's sulphuroi 
blast, 
This sweet-visaged Cherub of Parian stone 
So far from the holy enclosure was cast, 
To couch in this thicket of brambles alone, 

To rest where the lizard may bask in the palm 
Of his half-open hand pure from blemish orspeel 
And the green, gilded snake, without troubling tl 
calm 
Of the beautiful countenance, twine round his nee 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

;Vhere haply (kind service to Piety due !) 
■ When winter the grove of its mantle bereaves, 
'■Some bird (like our own honoured redbreast) may 
strew 
The desolate Slumberer with moss and with leaves. 
"uentes once harboured the good and the brave, 
i Nor to her was the dance of soft pleasure unknown ; 
;Ier banners for festal enjoyment did wave 
 While the thrill of her fifes thro' the mountains 
was blown : 
hw gads the wild vine o'er the pathless ascent ; — 
silence of Nature, how deep is thy sway, 
Vhen the whMwind of human destruction is spent, 
Our tumults appeased, and our strifes passed away ! 

HE CHURCH OF SAN SALVADOR, SEEN FROM THE 
LAKE OF LUGANO. 
his Church was almost destroyed by lightning a few years 
ago, but the altar and the image of the Patron Saint 
were untouched. The Mount, upon the summit of 
which the Church is built, stands amid the intricacies 
of the Lake of Lugano ; and is, from a hundred points 
of view, its principal ornament, rising to the height of 
 feet-, and, on one side, nearly perpendicular. The 
ascent is toilsome ; but the traveller who performs it 
will be amply rewarded. Splendid fertility, rich woods 
and dazzling waters, seclusion and confinement of view 
contrasted with sea-like extent of plain fading into the 
sky ; and this again, in an opposite quarter, with an 
horizon of the loftiest and boldest Alps — unite in com- 
posing a prospect more diversified by magnificence, 
beauty, and sublimity, than perhaps any other point 
in Europe, of so inconsiderable an elevation, commands. 

; Thou sacred Pile ! whose turrets rise 
! From yon steep mountain's loftiest stage, 
f Guarded by lone San Salvador ; 
; Sink (if thou must) as heretofore, 
i To sulphurous bolts a sacrifice, 
iBut ne'er to human rage ! 
On Horeb's top, on Sinai, deigned 
To rest the universal Lord : 
' Why leap the fountains from their cells 
 Where everlasting Bounty dwells ? — 
iThat, while the Creature is sustained, 
His God may be adored. 
Cliffs, fountains, rivers, seasons, times — 
| Let all remind the soul of heaven ; 
Our slack devotion needs them all ; 
And Faith— so oft of sense the thrall, 

While she, by aid of Nature, climbs — 
May hope to be forgiven. 
Glory, and patriotic Love, 
And all the Pomps of this frail < spot 
Which men call Earth,' have yearned to seek, 
Associate with the simply meek, 
Religion in the sainted grove, 
And in the hallowed grot. 
Thither, in time of adverse shocks, 
Of fainting hopes and backward wills, 
Did mighty Tell repair of old — 
A Hero cast in Nature's mould, 
Deliverer of the stedfast rocks 
And of the ancient hills ! 
He, too, of battle-martyrs chief ! 
Who, to recal his daunted peers, 
For victory shaped an open space, 
By gathering with a wide embrace, 
Into his single breast, a sheaf 
Of fatal Austrian spears . 

THE ITALIAN ITINERANT, AND THE SWISS GOATHERD. 
PART I. 
r. 
Now that the farewell tear is dried, 
Heaven prosper thee, be hope thy guide ! 
Hope be thy guide, adventurous Boy ; 
The wages of thy travel, joy ! 
Whether for London bound — to trill 
Thy mountain notes with simple skill ; 
Or on thy head to poise a show 
Of Images in seemly row ; 
The graceful form of milk-white Steed, 
Or Bird that soared with Ganymede ; 
Or through our hamlets thou wilt bear 
The sightless Milton, with his hair 
Around his placid temples curled ; 
And Shakspeare at his side — a freight, 
If clay could think and mind were weight, 
For him who bore the world ! 
Hope be thy guide, adventurous Boy j 
The wages of thy travel, joy ! 

 Arnold Winkelried, at the battle of Sempacb, broke 
an Austrian phalanx in this manner. The event is one of 
the most famous in the annals of Swiss heroism; and 
pictures and prints of it are frequent throughout the 
country. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

But thou, perhaps, (alert as free 
Though serving sage philosophy) 
Wilt ramble over hill and dale, 
A Vender of the well- wrought Scale, 
Whose sentient tube instructs to time 
A purpose to a fickle clime : 
Whether thou choose this useful part, 
Or minister to finer art, 
Though robbed of many a cherished dream, 
And crossed by many a shattered scheme, 
What stirring wonders wilt thou see 
In the proud Isle of liberty ! 
Yet will the Wanderer sometimes pine 
With thoughts which no delights can chase, 
Recal a Sister's last embrace, 
His Mother's neck entwine ; 
Nor shall forget the Maiden coy 
That xoonld have loved the bright-haired Boy ! 

My Song, encouraged by the grace 
That beams from his ingenuous face, 
For this Adventurer scruples not 
To prophesy a golden lot ; 
Due recompence, and safe return 
To Como's steeps — : his happy bourne ! 
Where he, aloft in garden glade, 
Shall tend, with his own dark-eyed Maid, 
The towering maize, and prop the twig 
That ill supports the luscious fig ; 
Or feed his eye in paths sun-proof 
With purple of the trellis-roof, 
That through the jealous leaves escapes 
From Cadenabbia's pendent grapes. 
— Oh might he tempt that Goatherd-child 
To share his wanderings ! him whose look 
Even yet my heart can scarcely brook, 
So touchingly he smiled — 
As with a rapture caught from heaven — 
For unasked alms in pity given. 

With nodding plumes, and lightly drest 
Like foresters in leaf-green vest, 
The Helvetian Mountaineers, on ground 
For Tell's dread archery renowned, 
Before the target stood — to claim 
The guerdon of the steadiest aim. 
Loud was the rifle-gun's report — 
A startling thunder quick and short ! 

But, flying through the heights around, 
Echo prolonged a tell-tale sound 
Of hearts and hands alike ' prepared 
The treasures they enjoy to guard !' 
And, if there be a favoured hour 
When Heroes are allowed to quit 
The tomb, and on the clouds to sit 
With tutelary power, 
On their Descendants shedding grace — 
This was the hour, and that the place. 
n. 
But Truth inspired the Bards of old 
When of an iron age they told, 
Which to unequal laws gave birth, 
And drove Astraea from the earth. 
— A gentle Boy (perchance with blood 
As noble as the best endued, 
But seemingly a Thing despised ; 
Even by the sun and air unprized ; 
For not a tinge or flowery streak 
Appeared upon Ms tender cheek) 
Heart-deaf to those rebounding notes, 
Apart, beside his silent goats, 
Sate watching in a forest shed, 
Pale, ragged, with bare feet and head ; 
Mute as the snow upon the hill, 
And, as the saint he prays to, still. 
Ah, what avails heroic deed ? 
What liberty ] if no defence 
Be won for feeble Innocence. 
Father of all ! though wilful Manhood read 
His punishment in soul-distress, 
Grant to the morn of life its natural blessedness ! 

XXVI. 
THE LAST SUPPER, BY LEONARDO DA VINCI, IN Till 
REFECTORY OF THE CONVENT OF MARIA DELL 
GRAZIA MILAN . 
Tho' searching damps and many an envious flaw 
Have marred this Work ; the calm ethereal gra<v 
The love deep-seated in the Saviour's face, 
The mercy, goodness, have not failed to awe 
The Elements ; as they do melt and thaw 
The heart of the Beholder — and erase 
(At least for one rapt moment) every trace 
Of disobedience to the primal law. 
The annunciation of the dreadful truth 
Made to the Twelve, survives: Up, forehead, cheek j 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

c 

Imd hand reposing on the board in ruth 
j)f what it utters, while the unguilty seek 
ilnquestionable meanings — still bespeak 
I labour worthy of eternal youth ! 

THE ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, . 
High on her speculative tower 
Stood Science waiting for the hour 
When Sol was destined to endure 
That darkening of his radiant face 
Which Superstition strove to chase, 
Erewhile, with rites impure. 
Afloat beneath Italian sides, 
Through regions fair as Paradise 
We gaily passed, — till Nature wrought 
A silent and unlooked-for change, 
That checked the desultory range 
Of joy and sprightly thought. 
Where'er was dipped the toiling oar, 
The waves danced round us as before, 
As lightly, though of altered hue, 
Mid recent coolness, such as falls 
At noontide from umbrageous walls 
That screen the morning dew. 
No vapour stretched its wings ; no cloud 
Cast far or near a murky shroud ; 
The sky an azure field displayed ; 
'Twas sunlight sheathed and gently charmed, 
Of all its sparkling rays disarmed, 
And as in slumber laid, — 
Or something night and day between, 
i Like moonshine — but the hue was green ; 
', Still moonshine, without shadow, spread 
i On jutting rock, and curved shore, 
.. Where gazed the peasant from his door 
| And on the mountain's head. 
I It tinged the Julian steeps — it lay, 
Lugano ! on thy ample bay ; 
• The solemnizing veil was drawn 
• O'er villas, terraces, and towers ; 
! To Albogasio's olive bowers, 
j Porlezza's verdant lawn. 

But Fancy with the speed of fire 
Hath past to Milan's loftiest spire, 
And there alights 'mid that aerial host 
Of Figures human and divine, 
White as the snows of Apennine 
Indurated by frost. 
Awe-stricken she beholds the array 
That guards the Temple night and day ; 
Angels she sees — that might from heaven have 
flown, 
And Virgin-saints, who not in vain 
Have striven by purity to gain 
The beatific crown — 
Sees long-drawn files, concentric rings 
Each narrowing above, each ; — the wings, 
The uplifted palms, the silent marble lips 
The starry zone of sovereign height "j — ■ 
All steeped in this portentous light ! 
All suffering dim eclipse ! 
Thus after Man had fallen (if aught 
These perishable spheres have wrought 
May with that issue be compared) 
Throngs of celestial visages, 
Darkening like water in the breeze, 
A holy sadness shared. 
Lo ! while I speak, the labouring Sun 
His glad deliverance has begun : 
The cypress waves her sombre plume 
More cheerily ; and town and tower, 
The vineyard and the olive-bower, 
Their lustre re-assume ! 
O Ye, who guard and grace my home 
While in far-distant lands we roam, 
What countenance hath this Day put on for you ? 
While we looked round with favoured eyes, 
Did sullen mists hide lake and skies 
And mountains from your view \ 
Or was it given you to behold 
Like vision, pensive though not cold, 
From the smooth breast of gay Winandermere ? 
Saw ye the soft yet awful veil 
Spread over Grasmere's lovely dale, 
Helvellyn's brow severe ? 

 See Note. 
f Above the highest circle of figures is a zone of metallic 
stars. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

I ask in vain — and know far less 
If sickness, sorrow, or distress 
Have spared my Dwelling to this hour ; 
Sad blindness ! hut ordained to prove 
Our faith in Heaven's unfailing love 
And all-controlling power. 

XXVIII. 
THE THREE COTTAGE GIRLS. 
I. 
How blest the Maid whose heart — yet free 
From Love's uneasy sovereignty — 
Beats with a fancy running high, 
Her simple cares to magnify ; 
Whom Labour, never urged to toil, 
Hath cherished on a healthful soil ; 
Who knows not pomp, who heeds not pelf ; 
Whose heaviest sin it is to look 
Askance upon her pretty Self 
Reflected in some crystal brook; 
Whom grief hath spared — who sheds no tear 
But in sweet pity ; and can hear 
Another's praise from envy clear. 
n. 
Such (but O lavish Nature ! why 
That dark unfathomable eye, 
Where lurks a Spirit that replies 
To stillest mood of softest skies, 
Yet hints at peace to be o'erthrown, 
Another's first, and then her own ?) 
Such, haply, yon Italian Maid, 
Our Lady's laggard Votaress, 
Halting beneath the chestnut shade 
To accomplish there her loveliness : 
Nice aid maternal fingers lend; 
A Sister serves with slacker hand ; 
Then, glittering like a star, she joins the festal band. 
in. 
How blest (if truth may entertain 
Coy fancy with a bolder strain) 
The Helvetian Girl — who daily braves, 
In her light skiff, the tossing waves, 
And quits the bosom of the deep 
Only to climb the rugged steep ! 
— Say whence that modulated shout ! 
From Wood-nymph of Diana's throng ? 
Or does the greeting to a rout 
Of giddy Bacchanals belong ? 
Jubilant outcry ! rock and glade 
Resounded — but the voice obeyed 
The breath of an Helvetian Maid. 

Her beauty dazzles the thick wood ; 
Her courage animates the flood ; 
Her steps the elastic green-sward meets 
Returning unreluctant sweets ; 
The mountains (as ye heard) rejoice 
Aloud, saluted by her voice ! 
Blithe Paragon of Alpine grace, 
Be as thou art — for through thy veins 
The blood of Heroes runs its race ! 
And nobly wilt thou brook the chains 
That, for the virtuous, Life prepares ; 
The fetters which the Matron wears ; 
The patriot Mother's weight of anxious cares ! 
v. 
 'Sweet Highland Girl ! a very shower 
Of beauty was thy earthly dower,' 
When thou didst flit before mine eyes, 
Gay Vision under sullen skies, 
While Hope and Love around thee played, 
Near the rough falls of Inversneyd ! 
Have they, who nursed the blossom, seen 
No breach of promise in the fruit  
Was joy, in following joy, as keen 
As grief can be in grief's pursuit ? 
When youth had flown did hope still bless 
Thy goings — or the cheerfulness 
Of innocence survive to mitigate distress  
VI. 
But from our course why turn — to tread 
A way with shadows overspread ; 
Where what we gladliest would believe 
Is feared as what may most deceive ? 
Bright Spirit, not with amaranth crowned 
But heath-bells from thy native ground. 
Time cannot thin thy flowing hair, 
Nor take one ray of light from Thee ; 
For in my Fancy thou dost share 
The gift of immortality ; 
And there shall bloom, with Thee allied, 
The Votaress by Lugano's side ; 
And that intrepid Nymph, on Uri's steep, descried ! 

XXIX. 
THE COLUMN INTENDED BY BUONAPARTE FOIl A TRI- 
UMPHAL EDIFICE IN MILAN, NOW LYING BY IHH 
WAY-SIDE IN THE SIMPLON PASS. 
Ambition— following down this far-famed slope 
Her Pioneer, the snow-dissolving Sun, 
While clarions prate of kingdoms to be won — 
Perchance, in future ages, here may stop ; 

 See address to a Highland Girl, p. . 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

faught to mistrust her nattering horoecope 
By admonition from this prostrate Stone ! 
VIemento uninscribed of Pride o'erthrown ; 
Canity's hieroglyphic ; a choice trope 
In Fortune's rhetoric. Daughter of the Rock, 
rtest where thy course was stayed by Power divine ! 
The Soul transported sees, from hint of thine, 
primes which the great Avenger's hand provoke, 
lears combats whistling o'erthe ensanguined heath: 
•tVhat groans ! what shrieks ! what quietness in 
death ! 

STANZAS, 

COMPOSED IN THE SIMPLON PASS. 

/allombrosa ! I longed in thy shadiest wood 
Po slumber, reclined on the moss-covered floor^ 
fo listen to Anio's precipitous flood, 
liVhenthe stillness of evening hath deepened its roar; 
|lo range through the Temples of P^estum, to muse 
in Pompeii preserved by her burial in earth ; 
)n pictures to gaze where they drank in their hues ; 
'ind murmur sweet songs on the ground of their 
birth ! 
■'he beauty of Florence, the grandeur of Rome, 
,!ould I leave them unseen, and not yield to regret ? 
Yith a hope (and no more) for a season to come, 
]Vhich ne'er may discharge the magnificent debt  
j'hou fortunate Region ! whose Greatness inurned 
..woke to new life from its ashes and dust ; 
"wice-glorified fields ! if in sadness I turned 
rom your infinite marvels, the sadness was just. 
fow, risen ere the light-footed Chamois retires 
'rom dew-sprinkled grass to heights guarded with 
snow, 
Ward themiststhathang overtheland of my Sires, 
i'rom the climate of myrtles contented I go. 
ily thoughts become bright like yon edging of Pines 
)n the steep's lofty verge : how it blacken'd the 
air! 
ut, touched from behind by the Sun, it now shines 
Vith threads that seem part of his own silver hair. 
hough the toil of the way with dear Friends we 
divide, 
Chough by the same zephyr our temples be fanned 
Vs we rest in the cool orange-bower side by side, 
V yearning survives which few hearts shall with- 
stand : 

Each step hath its value while homeward we move ; — 
joy when the girdle of England appears ! 
What moment in life is so conscious of love, 
Of love in the heart made more happy by tears ? 

ECHO, UPON THE GEMMI. 

What beast of chase hath broken from the cover l 
Stern Gemmi listens to as full a cry, 
As multitudinous a harmony 
Of sounds as rang the heights of Latmos over, 
When, from the soft couch of her sleeping Lover, 
Up-starting, Cynthia skimmed the mountain-dew 
In keen pursuit — and gave, where'er she flew, 
Impetuous motion to the Stars above her. 
A solitary Wolf-dog, ranging on 
Through the bleak concave, wakes this wondrous 
chime 
Of aery voices locked in unison, — 
Faint— far-off— near— deep- solemn and sublime! — 
So, from the body of one guilty deed, 
A thousand ghostly fears, and haunting thoughts, 
proceed ! 

PROCESSIONS. 
SUGGESTED ON A SABBATH MOKNING IN THE VALE OF 
CHAMOONT. 
To appease the Gods ; or public thanks to yield ; 
Or to solicit knowledge of events, 
Which in her breast Futurity concealed ; 
And that the past might have its true intents 
Feelingly told by living monuments — 
Mankind of yore were prompted to devise 
Rites such as yet Persepolis presents 
Graven on her cankered walls, solemnities 
That moved in long array before admiring eyes. 
The Hebrews thus, carrying in joyful state 
Thick boughs of palm, and willows from the brook, 
Marched round the altar — to commemorate 
How, when their course they through the desert 
took, 
Guided by signs which ne'er the sky forsook, 
They lodged in leafy tents and cabins low ; 
Green boughs were borne, while, for the blast that 
shook 
Down to the earth the walls of Jericho, 
Shouts rise, and storms of sound from lifted trum- 
pets blow ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

H 

And thus, in order, 'mid the sacred grove 
Fed in the Libyan waste by gushing wells, 
The priests and damsels of Ammonian Jove 
Provoked responses with shrill canticles ; 
While, iii a ship begirt with silver bells, 
They round his altar bore the horned God, 
Old Cham, the solar Deity, who dwells 
Aloft, yet hi a tilting vessel rode, 
When universal sea the mountains overflowed. 
Why speak of Roman Pomps ? the haughty claims 
Of Chiefs triumphant after ruthless wars ; 
The feast of Neptune — and the Cereal Games, 
With images, and crowns, and empty cars ; 
The dancing Salii — on the shields of Mars 
Smiting with fury ; and a deeper dread 
Scattered on all sides by the hideous jars 
Of Corybantian cymbals, while the head 
Of Cybele was seen, sublimely turreted ! 
At length a Spirit more subdued and soft 
Appeared — to govern Christian pageantries : 
The Cross, in calm procession, borne aloft 
Moved to the chant of sober litanies. 
Even such, this day, came wafted on the breeze 
From a long train — in hooded vestments fair 
Enwrapt — and winding, between Alpine trees 
Spiry and dark, around their House of prayer, 
Below the icy bed of bright Argentiere. 
Still in the vivid freshness of a dream, 
The pageant haunts me as it met our eyes ! 
Still, with those white-robed Shapes — a living 
Stream, 
The glacier Pillars join in solemn guise 
For the same service, by mysterious ties ; 
Numbers exceeding credible account 
Of number, pure and silent Votaries 
Issuing or issued from a wintry fount ; 
The impenetrable heart of that exalted Mount ! 
They, too, who send so far a holy gleam 
While they the Church engird with motion slow, 
A product of that awful Mountain seem, 
Poured from his vaults of everlasting snow ; 
Not virgin lilies marshalled in bright row, 
Not swans descending with the stealthy tide, 
A livelier sisterly resemblance show 
Than the fair Forms, that in long order glide, 
Bear to the glacier band — those Shapes aloft 
descried. 
 See Note. 

Trembling, I look upon the secret springs 
Of that licentious craving in the mind 
To act the God among external things, 
To bind, on apt suggestion, or unbind ; 
And marvel not that antique Faith inclined 
To crowd the world with metamorphosis, 
Vouchsafed in pity or in wrath assigned ; 
Such insolent temptations wouldst thou miss, 
Avoid these sights ; nor brood o'er Fable's dark 

ELEGIAC STANZAS. 

The lamented Youth whose untimely death gave occa- 
sion to these elegiac verses, was Frederick William God- 
dard, from Boston in North America. He was in his 
twentieth year, and had resided for some time with a 
clergyman in the neighbourhood of Geneva for the com- 
pletion of his education. Accompanied by a fellow-pupil, 
a native of Scotland, he had ju^t set out on a Swiss tour 
when it was his misfortune to fall in with a friend nt mine 
who was hastening to join our party. The travellers, after 
spending a day together on the road from Berne and at 
Soleure, took leave of each other at night, the young men 
having intended to proceed directly to Zurich. But, early 
in the morning my friend found his new acquaintances, 
who were informed of the object of his journey, and the 
friends he was in puruit of, equipped to accompany him, 
We met at Lucerne the succeeding evening, and Mr. G 
and his fellow-student became in consequence our travel 
ling companions for a couple of days. We ascended tti« 
Kighi together ; and. after contemplating the sunrise from 
that noble mountain, we separated at an hour and on a 
spot well suited to the parting of those who were to meof 
no more. Our party descended through the valley of oui 
Lady of the Snow, and our late companions, to Art. W« 
had hoped to meet in a few weeks at Geneva ; but on the 
third succeeding day (on the st of August) Mr. Goddarii 
perished, being overset in a boat while crossing the Jakco! 
Zurich. His companion saved himself by swimmiiif, anc 
was hospitably received in the mansion of a Swiss gent'e 
man (M. Keller) situated on the eastern coast of the lake 
The corpse of poor Goddard was ctt ashore on the Htati 
of the same gentleman, who generously performed n'l th< 
rites of hospitality which could be rendered to tho dead hi 
well as to the living. He caused a handsome mural innnii 
ment to be erected in the church of Ktisnacht, whiol 
records the premature fate of the young American, and or 
the shores too of the lake the traveller may read an inscrip 
tion pointing out the spot where the body was dtJKMitei 
by the waves. 
Lulled by the sound of pastoral bells, 
Rude Nature's Pilgrims did we go, 
From the dread summit of the Queen 
Of mountains, through a deep ravine, 
Where, in her holy chapel, dwells 
 Our Lady of the Snow.' 

 Mount Righi— Regina Montium. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

The sky was blue, the air was mild ; 
j Free were the streams and green the bowers ; 
! As if, to rough assaults unknown, 
i The genial spot had ever shown 
A countenance that as sweetly smiled — 
, The face of summer-hours. 
And we were gay, our hearts at ease ; 
With pleasure dancing through the frame 
; We journeyed ; all we knew of care — 
, Our path that straggled here and there ; 
Of trouble — but the fluttering breeze ; 
Of Winter — but a name. 
If foresight could have rent the veil 
: Of three short days — but hush — no more ! 
■ Calm is the grave, and calmer none 
\ Than that to which thy cares are gone, 
Thou Victim of the stormy gale ; 
Asleep on Zurich's shore ! 
i Oh Goddard ! what art thou \ — a name — 
A sunbeam followed by a shade ! 
Nor more, for aught that time supplies, 
: The great, the experienced, and the wise : 
Too much from this frail earth we claim, 
And therefore are betrayed. 
We met, while festive mirth ran wild, 
i Where, from a deep lake's mighty urn, 
j Forth slips, like an enfranchised slave, 
A sea-green river, proud to lave, 
\ With current swift and undented, 
' The towers of old Lucerne. 
We parted upon solemn ground 
Far-lifted towards the unfading sky ; 
i But all our thoughts were then of Earth, 
That gives to common pleasures birth ; 
And nothing in our hearts we found 
That prompted even a sigh. 
Fetch, sympathising Powers of air, 
Fetch, ye that post o'er seas and lands, 
Herbs moistened by Virginian dew, 
'., A most untimely grave to strew, 
Whose turf may never know the care 
Of kindred human hands ! 
i Beloved by every gentle Muse 
: He left his Transatlantic home : 
j Europe, a realised romance, 
; Had opened on his eager glance ; 
What present bliss ! — what golden views ! 
j What stores for years to come ! 

Though lodged, within no vigorous frame, 
His soul her daily tasks renewed, 
Blithe as the lark on sun-gilt wings 
High poised — or as the wren that sings 
In shady places, to proclaim 
Her modest gratitude. 
Not vain is sadly-uttered praise ; 
The words of truth's memorial vow 
Are sweet as morning fragrance shed 
From flowers mid Goldau's ruins bred ; 
As evening's fondly-lingering rays, 
On Righi's silent brow. 
Lamented Youth ! to thy cold clay 
Fit obsequies the Stranger paid ; 
And piety shall guard the Stone 
Which hath not left the spot unknown 
Where the wild waves resigned their prey- 
And that which marks thy bed. 
And, when thy Mother weeps for Thee, 
Lost Youth ! a solitary Mother ; 
This tribute from a casual Friend 
A not unwelcome aid may lend, 
To feed the tender luxury, 
The rising pang to smother . 

SKY-PROSPECT FROM THE PLAIN OF FRANCE. 
Lo ! in the burning west, the craggy nape 
Of a proud Ararat ! and, thereupon, 
The Ark, her melancholy voyage done ! 
Yon rampant cloud mimics a lion's shape ; 
There, combats a huge crocodile — agape 
A golden spear to swallow ! and that brown 
And massy grove, so near yon blazing town, 
Stirs and recedes — destruction to escape ! 
Yet all is harmless — as the Elysian shades 
Where Spirits dwell in undisturbed repose — 
Silently disappears, or quickly fades : 
Meek Nature's evening comment on the shows 
That for oblivion take their daily birth 
From all the fumin g vanities of Earth ! 

 The persuasion here expressed was not groundless. 
The first human consolation that the afflicted Mother felt, 
was derived from this tribute to her son's memory, a fact 
which the author learned, at his own residence, from her 
Daughter, who visited Europe some years afterwards. — 
Goldau is one of the villages desolated by the fall of part 
of the Mountain Rossberg. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 


ON BEING STRANDED NEAR THE HARBOUR OF 
BOULOGNE . 
Why cast ye back upon the Gallic shore 
Ye furious waves ! a patriotic Son 
Of England — who in hope her coast had won, 
His project crowned, his pleasant travel o'er  
Well — let him pace this noted beach once more, 
That gave the Roman his triumphal shells ; 
That saw the Corsican his cap and bells 
Haughtily shake, a dreaming Conqueror ! — 
Enough : my Country's cliffs I can behold, 
And proudly think, beside the chafing sea, 
Of checked ambition, tyranny controlled, 
And folly cursed with endless memory : 
These local recollections ne'er can cloy ; 
Such ground I from my very heart enjoy ! 

AFTER LANDING — THE VALLEY OF DOVER. 
Nov. . 
Where be the noisy followers of the game [passed 
Which faction breeds ; the turmoil where ? that 
Through Europe, echoing from the newsman's blast, 
Andfilled our hearts with grief for England's shame. 
Peace greets us ; — rambling on without an aim 
We mark majestic herds of cattle, free 
To ruminate, couched on the grassy lea ; 
And hear far-off the mellow horn proclaim 
The Season's harmless pastime. Ruder sound 
Stirs not ; enrapt I gaze with strange delight, 
While consciousnesses, not to be disowned, 
Here only serve a feeling to invite 
That lifts the spirit to a calmer height, 
And makes this rural stillness more profound. 

AT DOVER. 
From the Pier's head, musing, and with increase 
Of wonder, I have watched this sea-side Town^ 
Under the white cliff's battlemented crown, 
Hushed to a depth of more than Sabbath peace : 
The streets and quays are thronged, but why disown 
Their natural utterance : whence this strange 
release 
From social noise — silence elsewhere unknown ? — 
A Spirit whispered, " Let all wonder cease ; 
Ocean's o'erpowering murmurs have set free 
Thy sense from pressure of life's common din ; 
As the dread Voice that speaks from out the sea 
Of God's eternal Word, the Voice of Time 
Doth deaden, shocks of tumult, shrieks of crime, 
The shouts of folly, and the groans of sin." 
 See Note. 

DESULTORY STANZAS, 
UPON RECEIVING THE PEECEDING SHEETS FKOM THE PHES 
Is then the final page before me spread, 
Nor further outlet left to mind or heart ? 
Presumptuous Book ! too forward to be read, 
How can I give thee licence to depart ? 
One tribute more : unbidden feelings start 
Forth from their coverts ; slighted objects rise ; 
My spirit is the scene of such wild art 
As on Parnassus rules, when hghtning flies, 
Visibly leading on the thunder's harmonics. 
All that I saw returns upon my view, 
All that I heard comes back upon my ear, 
All that I felt this moment doth renew ; 
And where the foot with no unmanly fear 
Recoiled — and wings alone could travel — there 
I move at ease ; and meet contending themes 
That press upon me, crossing the career 
Of recollections vivid as the dreams [streams. 
Of midnight, — cities, plains, forests, and mighty i 
Where Mortal never breathed I dare to sit 
Among the interior Alps, gigantic crew, 
Who triumphed o'er diluvian power ! — and yet 
What are they but a wreck and residue, 
Whose only business is to perish ? — true 
To which sad course, these wrinkled Sons of Time 
Labour their proper greatness to subdue ; 
Speaking of death alone, beneath a clime 
Where life and rapture flow in plenitude sublime. 
Fancy hath flung for me an airy bridge 
Across thy long deep Valley, furious Rhone ! 
Arch that here rests upon the granite ridge 
Of Monte Rosa — there on frailer stone 
Of secondary birth, the Jung-frau's cone ; 
And, from that arch, down-looking on the Vale 
The aspect I behold of every zone ; 
A sea of foliage, tossing with the gale, 
Blithe Autumn's purple crown, and Winter's icj 
mail ! 
Far as St. Maurice, from yon eastern Forks , 
Down the main avenue my sight can range : 
And all its branchy vales, and all that lurks 
Within them, church, and town, and hut, and grange 
For my enjoyment meet in vision strange ; 
Snows, torrents ; — to the region's utmost bound, 
Life, Death, in amicable interchange ; — 

 At the head of the Vallais. See Note. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

 

But list ! the avalanche — the hush profound 
i'hatfollows — yet more awful than that awful sound ! 
}s not the chamois suited to his place ? 
'he eagle worthy of her ancestry ? 
,-Let Empires fall ; but ne'er shall Ye disgrace 
 our noble birthright, ye that occupy 
!our council-seats beneath the open sky, 
>n Sarnen's Mount , there judge of fit and right, 
in simple democratic majesty ; 
i oft breezes fanning your rough brows — the might 
|.nd purity of nature spread before your sight ! 
'rom this appropriate Court, renowned Lucerne 
'alls meto pace her honoured Bridge — that cheers 
/he Patriot's heart with pictures rude and stern, 
, L n uncouth Chronicle of glorious years, 
.ike portraiture, from loftier source, endears 
'hat work of kindred frame, which spans the lake 
ust at the point of issue, where it fears 
i'he form and motion of a stream to take ; 
yhere it begins to stir, yet voiceless as a snake. 
r olumea of sound, from the Cathedral rolled, 
'his long-roofed Vista penetrate — but see, 

 See Notes. 

One after one, its tablets, that unfold 
The whole design of Scripture history ; 
From the first tasting of the fatal Tree, 
Till the bright Star appeared in eastern skies, 
Announcing, One was born mankind to free ; 
His acts, his wrongs, his final sacrifice ; 
Lessons for every heart, a Bible for all eyes. 
Our pride misleads, our timid likings kill. 
— Long may these homely Works devised of old, 
These simple efforts of Helvetian skill, 
Aid, with congenial influence, to uphold 
The State, — the Country's destiny to mould ; 
Turning, for them who pass, the common dust 
Of servile opportunity to gold ; 
Filling the soul with sentiments august — 
The beautiful, the brave, the holy, and the just ! 
No more ; Time halts not in his noiseless march — ■ 
Nor turns, nor winds, as doth the liquid flood ; 
Life slips from underneath us, like that arch 
Of airy workmanship whereon we stood, 
Earth stretched below, heaven in our neighbourhood. 
Go forth, my little Book ! pursue thy way ; 
Go forth, and please the gentle and the good ; 
Nor be a whisper stifled, if it say 
That treasures, yet untouched, may grace some 
future Lay. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

MEMOEIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 
. 

TO HENRY CRABB ROBINSON. 

Companion ! by whose buoyant Spirit cheered, 
In whose experience trusting, day by day 
Treasures I gained with zeal that neither feared 
The toils nor felt the crosses of the way, 
Rvdal Mount, Feb. Uth,  

These records take, and happy should I be 
Were but the Gift a meet Return to thee 
For kindnesses that never ceased to flow, 
And prompt self-sacrifice to which I owe 
Far more than any heart but mine can know. 
AV. WORDSWORTH. 

The Tour of which the following Poems are very inadequate remembrances was shortened by report, too woll 
founded, of the prevalence of Cholera at Naples. To make some amends for what was reluctantly left unseen in the 
South of Italy, we visited the Tuscan Sanctuaries among the Apennines, and the principal Italian Lakes among tlie 
Alps. Neither of those lakes, nor of Venice, is there any notice in these Poems, chiefly because I have touched npou 
them elsewhere. See, in particular, " Descriptive Sketches," " Memorials of a Tour on the Continent in  " and a 
Sonnet upon the extinction of the Venetian Republic. 

MUSINGS NEAR AQUAPENDENTE. 
April, . 
Ye Apennines ! with all your fertile vales 
Deeply embosomed, and your winding shores 
Of either sea, an Islander by birth, 
A Mountaineer by habit, would resound 
Your praise, in meet accordance with your claims 
Bestowed by Nature, or from man's great deeds 
Inherited : — presumptuous thought ! — it fled 
Like vapour, like a towering cloud, dissolved. 
Not, therefore, shall my mind give way to sadness ; — 
Yon snow-white torrent-fall, plumb down it drops 
Yet ever hangs or seems to hang in air, 
Lulling the leisure of that high perched town, 
Aquapendente, in her lofty site 
Its neighbour and its namesake — town, and flood 
Forth flashing out of its own gloomy chasm 
Bright sunbeams — the fresh verdure of this lawn 
Strewn with grey rocks, and on the horizon's verge, 
O'er intervenient waste, through glimmering haze, 
Unquestionably kenned, that cone-shaped hill 
With fractured summit, no indifferent sight 
To travellers, from such comforts as are thine, 
Bleak Radicofani ! escaped with joy — 
These are before me ; and the varied scene 
May well suffice, till noon-tide's sultry heat 

Relax, to fix and satisfy the mind 
Passive yet pleased. What ! with this Broom in 
flower 
Close at my side! She bids me fly to greet 
Her sisters, soon like her to be attired 
With golden blossoms opening at the feet 
Of my own Fairfield. The glad greeting gfren, ! 
Given with a voice and by a look returned 
Of old companionship, Time counts not minutes 
Ere, from accustomed paths, familiar fields, 
The local Genius hurries me aloft, 
Transported over that cloud-wooing hill, 
Seat Sandal, a fond suitor of the clouds, 
With dream-like smoothness, to Helvellyn's top, 
There to alight upon crisp moss and range, 
Obtaining ampler boon, at every step, 
Of visual sovereignty — hills multitudinous, 
(Not Apennine can boast of fairer) hills 
Pride of two nations, wood and lake and plains, 
And prospect right below of deep coves sli 
By skeleton arms, that, from the mountain's bTUM 
Extended, clasp the winds, with mutual moan 
Struggling for liberty, while undismayed 
The shepherd struggles with them. Onward tlienc 
And downward by the skirt of Greenside fell, 
And by Glenridding-screes, and low Glencoign, 
Places forsaken now, though loving still 
The muses, as they loved them in the days 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 

 

the old minstrels and the border bards. — 
iit here am I fast bound ; and let it pass, 
e simple rapture ; — who that travels far 
feed his mind with watchful eyes could share 
wish to share it % — One there surely was, 
'he Wizard of the North," with anxious hope 
ought to this genial climate, when disease 
\ eyed upon body and mind — yet not the less 
\ ,d his sunk eye kindled at those dear words 
'fat spake of bards and minstrels ; and his spirit 
Id flown with mine to old Helvellyn's brow, 
Biere once together, in his day of strength, 
">.i stood rejoicing, as if earth were free 
'. Dm sorrow, like the sky above our heads. 
^ears followed years, and when, upon the eve 
(his last going from Tweed-side, thought turned, 
(i by another's sympathy was led, 
' this bright land, Hope was for him no friend, 
] owledge no help ; Imagination shaped 
I promise. Still, in more than ear-deep seats, 
a.'vives for me, and cannot but survive 
Is tone of voice which wedded borrowed words 
'. sadness not their own, when, with faint smile 
I.'ced by intent to take from speech its edge, 
| said, "When I am there, although 'tis fair, 
Vill be another Yarrow." Prophecy 
lire than fulfilled, as gay Campania's shores 
fin witnessed, and the city of seven hills, 
I r sparkling fountains, and her mouldering tombs ; 
.  more than all, that Eminence which showed 
I.r splendours, seen, not felt, the while he stood 
./lew short steps (painful they were) apart 
] >m Tasso's Convent-haven, and retired grave. 

J eace to their Spirits ! why should Poesy 
Id to the lure of vain regret, and hover 
: gloom on wings with confidence outspread 
'. move in sunshine  — Utter thanks, my Soul ! 
 opered with awe, and sweetened by compassion 
I - them who in the shades of sorrow dwell, 
[it I — so near the term to human life 
J.oointed by man's common heritage, 
Bil as the frailest, one withal (if that 
Iserve a thought) but little known to fame- - 
free to rove where Nature's loveliest looks, 
s noblest relics, history's rich bequests, 
I led to reanimate and but feebly cheered 
 i whole world's Darling— free to rove at will 
r high and low, and if requiring rest, 
t from enjoyment only. 
Thanks poured forth 
• what thus far hath blessed my wanderings, 
thanks 

Fervent but humble as the lips can breathe 
Where gladness seems a duty — let me guard 
Those seeds of expectation which the fruit 
Already gathered in this favoured Land 
Enfolds within its core. The faith be mine, 
That He who guides and governs all, approves 
When gratitude, though disciplined to look 
Beyond these transient spheres, doth wear a crown 
Of earthly hope put on with trembling hand ; 
Nor is least pleased, we trust, when golden beams, 
Reflected through the mists of age, from hours 
Of innocent delight, remote or recent, 
Shoot but a little way — 'tis all they can — 
Into the doubtful future. Who would keep 
Power must resolve to cleave to it through life, 
Else it deserts him, surely as he lives. 
Saints would not grieve nor guardian angels frown 
If one — while tossed, as was my lot to be, 
In a frail bark urged by two slender oars 
Over waves rough and deep, that, when they broke, 
Dashed their white foam against the palace walls 
Of Genoa the superb — should there be led 
To meditate upon his own appointed tasks, 
However humble in themselves, with thoughts 
Raised and sustained by memory of Him 
Who oftentimes within those narrow bounds 
Rocked on the surge, there tried his spirit's strength 
And grasp of purpose, long ere sailed his ship 
To lay a new world open. 
Nor less prized 
Be those impressions which incline the heart 
To mild, to lowly, and to seeming weak, 
Bend that way her desires. The dew, the storm — 
The dew whose moisture fell in gentle drops 
On the small hyssop destined to become, 
By Hebrew ordinance devoutly kept, 
A purifying instrument — the storm 
That shook on Lebanon the cedar's top, 
And as it shook, enabling the blind roots 
Further to force their way, endowed its trunk 
With magnitude and strength fit to uphold 
The glorious temple — did alike proceed 
From the same gracious will, were both an offspring 
Of bounty infinite. 
Between Powers that aim 
Higher to lift their lofty heads, impelled 
By no profane ambition, Powers that thrive 
By conflict, and their opposites, that trust 
In lowliness — a mid- way tract there lies 
Of thoughtful sentiment for every mind 
Pregnant with good. Young, Middle-aged, and Old, 
From century on to century, must have known 
The emotion — nay, more fitly were it said — 
The blest tranquillity that sunk so deep 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 


Into my spirit, when I paced, enclosed 
In Pisa's Campo Santo, the smooth floor 
Of its Arcades paved with sepulchral slabs, 
And through each window's open fret- work looked 
O'er the blank Area of sacred earth 
Fetched from Mount Calvary, or haply delved 
In precincts nearer to the Saviour's tomb, 
By hands of men, humble as brave, who fought 
For its deliverance — a capacious field 
That to descendants of the dead it holds 
And to all living mute memento breathes, 
More touching far than aught which on the walls 
Is pictured, or their epitaphs can speak, 
Of the changed City's long-departed power, 
Glory, and wealth, which, perilous as they are, 
Here did not kill, but nourished, Piety. 
And, high above that length of cloistral roof, 
Peering in air and backed by azure sky, 
To kindred contemplations ministers 
The Baptistery's dome, and that which swells 
From the Cathedral pile ; and with the twain 
Conjoined in prospect mutable or fixed 
(As hurry on in eagerness the feet, 
Or pause) the summit of the Leaning-tower. 
Nor less remuneration waits on him 
Who having left the Cemetery stands 
In the Tower's shadow, of decline and fall 
Admonished not without some sense of fear, 
Fear that soon vanishes before the sight 
Of splendor unextinguished, pomp unscathed, 
And beauty unimpaired. Grand in itself, 
And for itself, the assemblage, grand and fair 
To view, and for the mind's consenting eye 
A type of age in man, upon its front 
Bearing the world-acknowledged evidence 
Of past exploits, nor fondly after more 
Struggling against the stream of destiny, 
But with its peaceful majesty content. 
■ — Oh what a spectacle at every turn 
The Place unfolds, from pavement skinned with 
moss, 
Or grass-grown spaces, where the heaviest foot 
Provokes no echoes, but must softly tread ; 
Where Solitude with Silence paired stops short 
Of Desolation, and to Ruin's scythe 
Decay submits not. 
But where'er my steps 
Shall wander, chiefly let me cull with care 
Those images of genial beauty, oft 
Too lovely to be pensive in themselves 
But by reflexion made so, which do best 
And fitliest serve to crown with fragrant wreaths 
Life's cup when almost filled with years, like mine. 
— How lovely robed in forenoon light and shade, 

Each ministering to each, didst thou appear 
Savona, Queen of territory fair 
As aught that marvellous coast thro' all its length 
Yields to the Stranger's eye. Remembrance holds 
As a selected treasure thy one cliff, 
That, while it wore for melancholy crest 
A shattered Convent, yet rose proud to have 
Clinging to its steep sides a thousand herbs 
And shrubs, whose pleasant looks gave proof ho'\ 
kind 
The breath of air can be where earth had else 
Seemed churlish. And behold, both far and near 
Garden and field all decked with orange bloom, 
And peach and citron, in Spring's mildest breeze 
Expanding ; and, along the smooth shore curved 
Into a natural port, a tideless sea, 
To that mild breeze with motion and with voice 
Softly responsive ; and, attuned to all 
Those vernal charms of sight and sound, appear 
Smooth space of turf which from the guardian for 
Sloped seaward, turf whose tender April green, 
In coolest climes too fugitive, might even here 
Plead with the sovereign Sun for -onger stay 
Than his unmitigated beams allow, 
Nor plead in vain, if beauty could preserve, 
From mortal change, aught that is born on earth 
Or doth on time depend. 
While on the brink 
Of that high Convent-crested cliff I stood, 
Modest Savona ! over all did brood 
A pure poetic Spirit — as the breeze, 
Mild — as the ver durej fresh — the sunshine, bright- 
Thy gentle Chiabrera ! — not a stone, 
Mural or level with the trodden floor, 
In Church or Chapel, if my curious quest 
Missed not the truth, retains a single name 
Of young or old, warrior, or saint, or sage, 
To whose dear memories his sepulchral veree 
Paid simple tribute, such as might have flowed 
From the clear spring of a plain English heart, 
Say rather, one in native fellowship 
With all who want not skill to couple grief 
With praise, as genuine admiration prompts. 
The grief, the praise, are severed from their dus. 
Yet in his page the records of that worth 
Survive, uninjured ;-^-glory then to words, 
Honour to word-preserving Arts, and hail 
Ye kindred local influences that still, 
If Hope's familiar whispers merit faith, 
Await my steps when they the breezy height 
Shall range of philosophic Tusculum ; 
Or Sabine vales explored insptire a wish 
To meet the shade of Horace by the side 
Of his Bandusian fount ; or I invoke 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 

 

is presence to point out the spot where once 
e sate, and eulogized with earnest pen 
eace, leisure, freedom, moderate desires ; 
nd all the immunities of rural life 
Xtolled, behind Vacuna's crumbling fane. 
;r let me loiter, soothed with what is given 
'or asking more, on that delicious Bay, 
arthenope's Domain — Virgilian haunt, 
lustrated with never-dying verse, 
;nd, by the Poet's laurel-shaded tomb, 
ige after age to Pilgrims from all lands 
ndeared. 
And who — if not a man as cold 
i heart as dull in brain — while pacing ground 
iosen by Rome's legendary Bards, high minds 
Eat of her early straggles well inspired 
d localize heroic acts — could look 
•pon the spots with undelighted eye, 
hough even to their last syllable the Lays 
nd very names of those who gave them birth 
jave perished \ — Verily, to her utmost depth, 
pagination feels what Reason fears not 
lo recognize, the lasting virtue lodged 
[ those bold fictions that, by deeds assigned 
p the Valerian, Fabian, Curian Race, 
!nd others like in fame, created Powers 
i r ith attributes from Hutory derived, 
y Poesy irradiate, and yet graced, 
trough marvellous felicity of skill, 
; r ith something more propitious to high aims 
pan either, pent within her separate sphere, 
oft with justice claim. 
And not disdaining 
Jon with those primeval energies 
p virtue consecrate, stoop ye from your height 
iristian Traditions ! at my Spirit's call 
iescend, and, on the brow of ancient Rome 
;s she survives in ruin, manifest 
our glories mingled with the brightest hues 
i her memorial halo, fading, fading, 
lit never to be extinct while Earth endures. 
, come, if undishonoured by the prayer, 
from all her Sanctuaries ! — Open for my feet 
le Catacombs, give to mine eyes a glimpse 
f the Devout, as, mid your glooms convened 
ox safety, they of yore enclasped the Cross 
Q knees that ceased from trembling, or intoned 
Heir orisons with voices half-suppressed, 
jut sometimes heard, or fancied to be heard, 
|ven at this hour. 
And thou Mamertine prison, 
ito that vault receive me from whose depth 
sues, revealed in no presumptuous vision, 
lbeit lifting human to divine, 

A Saint, the Church's Rock, the mystic Keys 
Grasped in his hand ; and lo ! with upright sword 
Prefiguring his own impendent doom, 
The Apostle of the Gentiles ; both prepared 
To suffer pains with heathen scorn and hate 
Inflicted ;— blessed Men, for so to Heaven 
They follow their dear Lord ! 
Time flows — nor winds, 
Nor stagnates, nor precipitates his course, 
But many a benefit borne upon his breast 
For human-kind sinks out of sight, is gone, 
No one knows how ; nor seldom is put forth 
An angry arm that snatches good away, 
Never perhaps to reappear. The Stream 
Has to our generation brought and brings 
Innumerable gains ; yet we, who now 
Walk in the light of day, pertain full surely 
To a chilled age, most pitiably shut out 
From that which is and actuates, by forms, 
Abstractions, and by lifeless fact to fact 
Minutely linked with diligence uninspired, 
Unrectified, unguided, unsustained, 
By godlike insight. To this fate is doomed 
Science, wide-spread and spreading still as be 
Her conquests, in the world of sense made known. 
So with the internal mind it fares ; and so 
With morals, trusting, in contempt or fear 
Of vital principle's controlling law, 
To her purblind guide Expediency ; and so 
Suffers religious faith. Elate with view 
Of what is won, we overlook or scorn 
The best that should keep pace with it, and must, 
Else more and more the general mind will droop, 
Even as if bent on perishing. There lives 
No faculty within us which the Soul 
Can spare, and humblest earthly Weal demands, 
For dignity not placed beyond her reach, 
Zealous co-operation of all means 
Given or acquired, to raise us from the mire, 
And liberate our hearts from low pursuits. 
By gross Utilities enslaved we need 
More of ennobling impulse from the past, 
If to the future aught of good must come 
Sounder and therefore holier than the ends 
Which, in the giddiness of self-applause, 
We covet as supreme. grant the crown 
That Wisdom wears, or take his treacherous staff 
From Knowledge ! — If the Muse, whom I have 
served 
This day, be mistress of a single pearl 
Fit to be placed in that pure diadem ; 
Then, not in vain, under these chesnut boughs 
Reclined, shall I have yielded up my soul 
To transports from the secondary founts 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Flowing of time and place, and paid to both 
Due homage ; nor shall fruitlessly have striven, 
By love of beauty moved, to enshrine in verse 
Accordant meditations, which in times 
Vexed and disordered, as our own, may shed 
Influence, at least among a scattered few, 
To soberness of mind and peace of heart 
Friendly ; as here to my repose hath been 
This flowering broom's dear neighbourhood, the 
light 
And murmur issuing from yon pendent flood, 
And all the varied landscape. Let us now 
Rise, and to-morrow greet magnificent Rome. 

THE PINE OF MONTE MARIO AT ROME. 
I saw far off the dark top of a Pine 
Look like a cloud — a slender stem the tie 
That bound it to its native earth — poised high 
'Mid evening hues, along the horizon line, 
Striving in peace each other to outshine. 
But when I learned the Tree was living there, 
Saved from the sordid axe by Beaumont's care, 
Oh, what a gush of tenderness was mine ! 
The rescued Pine-tree, with its sky so bright 
And cloud-like beauty, rich in thoughts of home, 
Death-parted friends, and days too swift in flight, 
Supplanted the whole majesty of Rome 
(Then first apparent from the Pincian Height) 
Crowned with St. Peter's everlasting Dome f. 

Is this, ye Gods, the Capitolian Hill ? 
Yon petty Steep in truth the fearful Rock, 
Tarpeian named of yore, and keeping still 
That name, a local Phantom proud to mock 
The Traveller's expectation  — Could our Will 
Destroy the ideal Power within, 'twere done 
Thro' what men see and touch, — slaves wandering on, 
Impelled by thirst of all but Heaven-taught skill. 
Full oft, our wish obtained, deeply we sigh ; 
Yet not unrecompensed are they who learn, 
From that depression raised, to mount on high 
With stronger wing, more clearly to discern 
Eternal things ; and, if need be, defy 
Change, with a brow not insolent, though stern. 

t See note. 

AT ROME. REGRETS. — IN ALLUSION TO NlEBUm 
AND OTHER MODERN HISTORIANS. 
Those old credulities, to nature dear, 
Shall they no longer bloom upon the stock 
Of History, stript naked as a rock 
'Mid a dry desert ? What is it we hear ? 
The glory of Infant Rome must disappear, 
Her morning splendors vanish, and their place 
Know them no more. If Truth, who veiled her fae 
With those bright beams yet hid it not, must stee 
Henceforth a humbler course perplexed and slow 
One solace yet remains for us who came 
Into this world in days when story lacked 
Severe research, that in our hearts we know 
How, for exciting youth's heroic flame, 
Assent is power, belief the soul of fact. 

CONTINUED. 
Complacent Fictions were they, yet the same 
Involved a history of no doubtful sense, 
History that proves by inward evidence 
From what a precious source of truth it came. 
Ne'er could the boldest Eulogist have dared 
Such deeds to paint, such characters to frame, 
But for coeval sympathy prepared 
To greet with instant faith their loftiest claim. 
None but a noble people could have loved 
Flattery in Ancient Rome's pure-minded style : 
Not in like sort the Runic Scald was moved ; 
He, nursed 'mid savage passions that defile 
Humanity, sang feats that well might call 
For the blood-thirsty mead of Odin's riotous Ha 

PLEA FOR THE HISTORIAN. 
Forbear to deem the Chronicler unwise, 
Ungentle, or untouched by seemly ruth, 
Who, gathering up all that Time's envious too 
Has spared of sound and grave realities, 
Firmly rejects those dazzling flatteries, 
Dear as they are to unsuspecting Youth, 
That might have drawn down Clio from the skic 
To vindicate the majesty of truth. 
Such was her office while she walked with men, 
A Muse, who, not unmindful of her Sire 
All-ruling Jove, whate'er the theme might be 
Revered her Mother, sage Mnemosyne, 
And taught her faithful servants how the lyre 
Should animate, but not mislead, the pen . 
 Quern virum lyra 
sumes celebrare Clio ? 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 

 

AT ROME. 
JThet — who have seen the noble Roman's scorn 
■ Break forth at thought of laying down his head, 
[When the blank day is over, garreted 
jtn his ancestral palace, where, from morn 
j To night, the desecrated floors are worn 
l By feet of purse-proud strangers ; they — who have 
read 
In one meek smile, beneath a peasant's shed, 
How patiently the weight of wrong is borne ; 
They — who have heard some learned Patriot treat 
Of freedom, with mind grasping the whole theme 
From ancient Rome, downwards through that 
bright dream 
Of Commonwealths, each city a starlike seat 
■Of rival glory ; they — fallen Italy — 
Nor must, nor will, nor can, despair of Thee ! 

NEAR ROME, IN SIGHT OF ST. PETER S. 
;Long has the dew been dried on tree and lawn j 
O'er man and beast a not unwelcome boon 
Is shed, the languor of approaching noon ; 
iro shady rest withdrawing or withdrawn 
Mute are all creatures, as this couchant fawn, 
pave insect-swarms that hum in air afloat, 
ave that the Cock is crowing, a shrill note, 
Startling and shrill as that which roused the dawn. 
!— Heard in that hour, or when, as now, the nerve 
Shrinks from the note as from a mis-timed thing, 
■)ft for a holy warning may it serve, 
Charged with remembrance of Ms sudden sting, 
His bitter tears, whose name the Papal Chair 
\nd yon resplendent Church are proud to hear. 

AT ALBA NO. 
j)ays passed — and Monte Calvo would not clear 
lis head from mist : and, as the wind sobbed 
through 
,Ubano's dripping Ilex avenue, 
My dull forebodings in a Peasant's ear 
I'^ound casual vent. She said, " Be of good cheer ; 
)ur yesterday's procession did not sue 
p vain ; the sky will change to sunny blue, 
'hanks to our Lady's grace." I smiled to hear, 
But not in scorn : — the Matron's Faith may lack 
jihe heavenly sanction needed to ensure 
fulfilment; but, we trust, her upward track 
'Stops not at this low point, nor wants the lure 
yt flowers the Virgin without fear may own, 
?or by her Son's blest hand the seed was sown. 

Near Anio's stream, I spied a gentle Dove 
Perched on an olive branch, and heard her cooing 
'Mid new-born blossoms that soft airs were wooing, 
While all things present told of joy and love. 
But restless Fancy left that olive grove 
To hail the exploratory Bird renewing 
Hope for the few, who, at the world's undoing, 
On the great flood were spared to live and move. 
O bounteous Heaven ! signs true as dove and bough 
Brought to the ark are coming evermore, 
Given though we seek them not, but, while we plough 
This sea of life without a visible shore, 
Do neither promise ask nor grace implore 
In what alone is ours, the living Now. 

FROM THE ALBAN HILLS, LOOKING TOWARDS ROME. 
Forgive, illustrious Country ! these deep sighs, 
Heaved less for thy bright plains and hills bestrewn 
With monuments decayed or overthrown, 
For all that tottering stands or prostrate lies, 
Than for like scenes in moral vision shown, 
Ruin perceived for keener sympathies ; 
Faith crushed, yet proud of weeds, her gaudy crown ; 
Virtues laid low, and mouldering energies. 
Yet why prolong this mournful strain? — Fallen 
Power, 
Thy fortunes, twice exalted, might provoke 
Verse to glad notes prophetic of the hour 
When thou, uprisen, shalt break thy double yoke, 
And enter, with prompt aid from the Most High, 
On the third stage of thy great destiny. 

NEAR THE LAKE OF THRASYMENE. 
When here with Carthage Rome to conflict came, 
An earthquake, mingling with the battle's shock, 
Checked not its rage ; unfelt the ground did rock, 
Sword dropped not, javelin kept its deadly aim. — 
Now all is sun-bright peace. Of that day's shame, 
Or glory, not a vestige seems to endure, 
Save in this Rill that took from blood the name 
Which yet it bears, sweet Stream! as crystal pure. 
So may all trace and sign of deeds aloof 
From the true guidance of humanity, 
Thro' Time and Nature's influence, purify 
Their spirit ; or, unless they for reproof 
Or warning serve, thus let them all, on ground 
That gave them being, vanish to a sound. 

 Sanguinetto. 
t 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

NEAR THE SAME LAKE. 
For action born, existing to be tried, 
Powers manifold we have that intervene 
To stir the heart that would too closely screen 
Her peace from images to pain allied. 
What wonder if at midnight, by the side 
Of Sanguinetto or broad Thrasymene, 
The clang of arms is heard, and phantoms glide, 
Unhappy ghosts in troops by moonlight seen ; 
And singly thine, vanquished Chief ! whose corse, 
Unburied, lay hid under heaps of slain : 
But who is He  — the Conqueror. Would he force 
His way to Rome ? Ah, no, — round hill and plain 
Wandering, he haunts, at fancy's strong command, 
This spot — his shadowy death-cup in his hand. 

THE CUCKOO AT LAVERNA. 
Mav th, . 
List — 'twas the Cuckoo. — with what delight 
Heard I that voice ! and catch it now, though faint, 
Far off and faint, and melting into air, 
Yet not to be mistaken. Hark again ! 
Those louder cries give notice that the Bird, 
Although invisible as Echo's self, 
Is wheeling hitherward. Thanks, happy Creature, 
For this unthought-of greeting ! 
While allured 
From vale to hill, from hill to vale led on, 
We have pursued, through various lands, a long 
And pleasant course ; flower after flower has blown, 
Embellishing the ground that gave them birth 
With aspects novel to my sight ; but still 
Most fair, most welcome, when they drank the dew 
In a sweet fellowship with kinds beloved, 
For old remembrance sake. And oft — where Spring 
Display'd her richest blossoms among files 
Of orange-trees bedecked with glowing fruit 
Ripe for the hand, or under a thick shade 
Of Ilex, or, if better suited to the hour, 
The lightsome Olive's twinkling canopy — 
Oft have I heard the Nightingale and Thrush 
Blending as in a common English grove 
Their love-songs ; but, where'er my feet mightroam, 
Whate'er assemblages of new and old, 
Strange and familiar, might beguile the way, 
A gratulation from that vagrant Voice 
Was wanting; — and most happily till now. 



For see, Laverna ! mark the far-famed Pile, 
High on the brink of that precipitous rock, 
Implanted like a Fortress, as in truth 
It is, a Christian Fortress, garrisoned 
In faith and hope, and dutiful obedience, 
By a few Monks, a stern society, 
Dead to the world and scorning earth-born joys. 
Nay — though the hopes that drew, the fears that 
drove, 
St. Francis, far from Man's resort, to abide 
Among these sterile heights of Apennine, 
Bound him, nor, since he raised yon House, have 
ceased 
To bind his spiritual Progeny, with rules 
Stringent as flesh can tolerate and live ; 
His milder Genius (thanks to the good God 
That made us) over those severe restraints 
Of mind, that dread heart-freezing discipline, 
Doth sometimes here predominate, and works 
By unsought means for gracious purposes ; 
For earth through heaven, for heaven, by changeful 
earth, 
Illustrated, and mutually endeared. 
Rapt though He were above the power of sense, 
Familiarly, yet out of the cleansed heart 
Of that once sinful Being overflowed 
On sun, moon, stars, the nether elements, 
And every shape of creature they sustain, 
Divine affections ; and with beast and bird 
(Stilled from afar — such marvel story tells — 
By casual outbreak of his passionate words, 
And from their own pursuits in field or grove 
Drawn to his side by look or act of love 
Humane, and virtue of his innocent life) 
He wont to hold companionship so free, 
So pure, so fraught with knowledge and delight, 
As to be likened in his Followers' minds 
To that which our first Parents, ere the fall 
From their high state darkened the Earth with fear 
Held with all Kinds in Eden's blissful bowers. 
Then question not that, 'mid the austere Band, 
Who breathe the air he breathed,tread where he trod 
Some true Partakers of his loving spirit 
Do still survive, and, with those gentle hearta 
Consorted, Others, in the power, the faith, 
Of a baptized imagination, prompt 
To catch from Nature's humblest monitors 
Whate'er they bring of impulses sublime. 
Thus sensitive must be the Monk, though pale 
With fasts, with vigils worn, depressed by years, 
Whom in a sunny glade I chanced to see, 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 

 - 

Jpon a pine-tree's storm-uprooted trunk, 
peated alone, with forehead sky-ward raised, 
lands clasped above the crucifix he wore 
Appended to his bosom, and lips closed 
y the joint pressure of his musing mood 
ind habit of his vow. That ancient Man — 
\Tor hapry less the Brother whom I marked, 
^s we approached the Convent gate, aloft 
Poking far forth from his aerial cell, 
k young Ascetic — Poet, Hero, Sage, 
le might have been, Lover belike he was — 
f they received into a conscious ear 
The notes whose first faint greeting startled me, 
Vhose sedulous iteration thrilled with joy 
My heart — may have been moved like me to think, 
\h ! not like me who walk in the world's ways, 
)n the great Prophet, styled the Voice of One 
yrymg amid the wilderness, and given, 
\ T ow that their snows must melt, their herbs and 
flowers 
Revive, their obstinate winter pass away, 
That awful name to Thee, thee, simple Cuckoo, 
jiVandering in solitude, and evermore 
foretelling and proclaiming, ere thou leave 
This thy last haunt beneath Italian skies 
To carry thy glad tidings over heights 
kill loftier, and to climes more near the Pole. 
Voice of the Desert, fare-thee-well ; sweet Bird ! 
If that substantial title please thee more, 
!? arewell ! — but go thy way, no need hast thou 
)f a good wish sent after thee ; from bower 
jPo bower as green, from sky to sky as clear, 
Thee gentle breezes waft — or airs that meet 
,rhy course and sport around thee softly fan — 
fill Night, descending upon hill and vale, 
Jrants to thy mission a brief term of silence, 
Vnd folds thy pinions up in blest repose. 

AT THE CONVENT OF CAMALDOLI. 
Brieve for the Man who hither came bereft, 
And seeking consolation from above ; 
>or grieve the less that skill to him was left 
To paint this picture of his lady-love : 
"an she, a blessed saint, the work approve ? 
i \.nd , good Brethren of the cowl, a tiling 
Bo fair, to which with peril he must cling, 
Ipestroy in pity, or with care remove. 
iThat bloom — those eyes — can they assist to bind 
^noughts that would stray from Heaven? The 
dream must cease 

To be ; by Faith, not sight, his soul must five ; 
Else will the enamoured Monk too surely find 
How wide a space can part from inward peace 
The most profound repose his cell can give. 


CONTINUED. 
The world forsaken, all its busy cares 
And stirring interests shunned with desperate flight, 
All trust abandoned in the healing might 
Of virtuous action ; all that courage dares, 
Labour accomplishes, or patience bears — 
Those helps rejected, they, whose minds perceive 
How subtly works man's weakness, sighs may heave 
For such a One beset with cloistral snares. 
Father of Mercy ! rectify his view, 
If with his vows this object ill agree ; 
Shed over it thy grace, and thus subdue 
Imperious passion in a heart set free : — 
That earthly love may to herself be true, 
Give him a soul that cleaveth unto thee . 

AT THE EREMITE OR UPPER CONVENT OF CAMALDOLI. 
What aim had they, the Pair of Monks, in size 
Enormous, dragged, while side by side they sate, 
By panting steers up to this convent gate ? 
How, with empurpled cheeks and pampered eyes, 
Dare they confront the lean austerities 
Of Brethren who, here fixed, on Jesu wait 
In sackcloth, and God's anger deprecate 
Through all that humbles flesh and mortifies ? 
Strange contrast ! — verily the world of dreams, 
Where mingle, as for mockery combined, 
Things in their very essences at strife, 
Shows not a sight incongruous as the extremes 
That everywhere, before the thoughtful miud, 
Meet on the solid ground of waking life . 

XVIII. 
AT VALLOMBROSA. 
Thick as autumnal leaves that strew the brooks 
In Vallombrosa, where Etrurian shades 
High over-arch'd embower %. 
Paradise Lost. 
" Vallombrosa — I longed in thy shadiest wood 
To slumber, reclined on the moss-covered floor !" 
Fond wish that was granted at last, and the Flood, 
That lulled me asleep bids me listen once more. 

 See Note. t See note. 
$ See for the two first lines, " Stanzas composed in the 
Simplon Pass," 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Its murmur how soft ! as it falls down the steep, 
Near that Cell — yon sequestered Retreat high in 
ah — 
Where our Milton was wont lonely vigils to keep 
For converse with God, sought through study and 
prayer. 
The Monks still repeat the tradition with pride, 
And its truth who shall doubt ? for his Spirit is 
here ; 
In the cloud-piercing rocks doth her grandeur abide, 
In the pines pointing heavenward her beauty 
austere ; 
In the flower-besprent meadows his genius we trace 
Turned to humbler delights, in which youth might 
confide, 
That would yield him fit help while prefiguring that 
Place 
Where, if Sin had not entered, Love never had died. 
When with life lengthened out came a desolate time, 
And darkness and danger had compassed him round, 
With a thought he would flee to these haunts of his 
prime, 
And here once again a kind shelter be found. 
And let me believe that when nightly the Muse 
Did waft him to Sion, the glorified hill, 
Here also, on some favoured height, he would choose 
To wander, and drink inspiration at will 
Vallombrosa ! of thee I first heard in the page 
Of that holiest of Bards, and the name for my mind 
Had a musical charm, which the winter of age 
And the changes it brings had no power to unbind. 
And now, ye Miltonian shades ! under you 
I repose, nor am forced from sweet fancy to part, 
While your leaves I behold and the brooks they 
will strewj 
And the realised vision is clasped to my heart. 
Even so, and unblamed, we rejoice as we may 
In Forms that must perish, frail objects of sense ; 
Unblamed — if the Soul be intent on the day 
When the Being of Beings shall summon her hence. 
For he and he only with wisdom is blest 
Who, gathering true pleasures wherever they grow, 
Looks up in all places, for joy or for rest, 
To the Fountain whence Time and Eternity flow. 

AT FLORENCE. 
Under the shadow of a stately Pile, 
The dome of Florence, pensive and alone, 
Nor giving heed to aught that passed the while, 
I stood, and gazed upon a marble stone, 
The laurelled Dante's favourite seat. A throne, 
In just esteem, it rivals ; though no style 
Be there of decoration to beguile 
The mind, depressed by thought of greatness flown, 
As a true man, who long had served the lyre, 
I gazed with earnestness, and dared no more. 
But in his breast the mighty Poet bore 
A Patriot's heart, warm with undying fire. 
Bold with the thought, in reverence I sate down, 
And, for a moment, filled that empty Throne. 

BEFORE THE PICTURE OF THE BAPTIST, BY RAPHAEL, 
IN THE GALLERY AT FLORENCE. 
The Baptist might have been ordain'd to cry 
Forth from the towers of that huge Pile, wherein 
His Father served Jehovah ; but how win 
Due audience, how for aught hut scorn defy 
The obstinate pride and wanton revelry 
Of the Jerusalem below, her sin 
And folly, if they with united din 
Drown not at once mandate and prophecy ? 
Therefore the Voice spake from the Desert, thenoe 
To Her, as to her opposite in peace, 
Silence, and holiness, and innocence, 
To Her and to all Lands its warning sent, 
Crying with earnestness that might not cease, 
" Make straight a highway for the Lord — repent ! " 

AT FLORENCE. FROM MICHAEL ANGELO. 
Rapt above earth by power of one fair face, 
Hers in whose sway alone my heart delights, 
I mingle with the blest on those pure heights 
Where Man, yet mortal, rarely finds a place. 
With Him who made the Work that Work accords 
So well, that by its help and through his grace 
I raise my thoughts, inform my deeds and words, 
Clasping her beauty in my soul's embrace. 
Thus, if from two fair eyes mine cannot turn, 
I feel how in their presence doth abide 
Light which to God is both the way and guide ; 
And, kindling at their lustre, if I burn, 
My noble fire emits the joyful ray 
That through the realms of glory shines for aye. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN ITALY. 

 

AT FLORENCE. FROM M. ANGELO. 
JEternal Lord ! eased of a cumbrous load, 
And loosened from the world, I turn to Thee ; 
>hnn, like a shattered hark, the storm, and flee 
To thy protection for a safe abode, 
[he crown of thorns, hands pierced upon the tree, 
rhe meek, benign, and lacerated face, 
iro a sincere repentance promise grace, 
To the sad soul give hope of pardon free. 
iVith justice mark not Thou, Light divine, 
vly fault, nor hear it with thy sacred ear ; 
Neither put forth that way thy arm severe ; 
iVash with thy blood my sins ; thereto incline 
klore readily the more my years require 
lelp, and forgiveness speedy and entire. 

lMONG THE RUINS OF A CONVENT IN THE APENNINES. 
f E Trees ! whose slender roots entwine 
l Altars that piety neglects ; 
iVhose infant arms enclasp the shrine 
Which no devotion now respects ; 
i not a straggler from the herd 
Here ruminate, nor shrouded bird, 
Chanting her low- voiced hymn, take pride 
,'n aught that ye would grace or hide — 
low sadly is your love misplaced, 
j?air Trees, your bounty run to waste ! 
ife, too, wild Flowers ! that no one heeds, 
And ye — full often spurned as weeds — 
In beauty clothed, or breathing sweetness 
From fractured arch and mouldering wall — 
Do but more touchingly recal 
Vlan's headstrong violence and Time's fleetness, 
Making the precincts ye adorn 
Appear to sight still more forlorn. 

IN LOMBARDY. 
See, where his difficult way that Old Man wins 
Bent by a load of Mulberry leaves ! — most hard 
Appears Ms lot, to the small Worm's compared, 
(For whom his toil with early day begins. 
[Acknowledging no task-master, at will 
'(As if her labour and her ease were twins) 
\She seems to work, at pleasure to lie still ; — 
,And softly sleeps within the thread she spins. 

So fare they — the Man serving as her Slave. 
Ere long their fates do each to each conform : 
Both pass into new being, — but the Worm, 
Transfigured, sinks into a hopeless grave ; 
His volant Spirit will, he trusts, ascend 
To bliss unbounded, glory without end. 

AFTER LEAVING ITALY. 
Fair Land ! Thee all men greet with joy ; how few, 
Whose souls take pride in freedom, virtue, fame, 
Part from thee without pity dyed in shame : 
I could not — while from Venice we withdrew, 
Led on till an Alpine strait confined our view 
Within its depths, and to the shore we came 
Of Lago Morto, dreary sight and name, 
Which o'er sad thoughts a sadder colouring threw. 
Italia ! on the surface of thy spirit, 
(Too aptly emblemed by that torpid lake) 
Shall a few partial breezes only creep ? — 
Be its depths quickened ; what thou dost inherit 
Of the world's hopes, dare to fulfil ; awake, 
Mother of Heroes, from thy death-like sleep ! 

CONTINUED. 
As indignation mastered grief, my tongue 
Spake bitter words ; words that did ill agree 
With those rich stores of Nature's imagery, 
And divine Art, that fast to memory clung — 
Thy gifts, magnificent Region, ever young 
In the sun's eye, and in his sister's sight 
How beautiful ! how worthy to be sung 
In strains of rapture, or subdued delight ! 
I feign not ; witness that unwelcome shock 
That followed the first sound of German speech, 
Caught the far-winding barrier Alps among. 
In that announcement, greeting seemed to mock 
Parting ; the casual word had power to reach 
My heart, and filled that heart with conflict strong. 

COMPOSED AT RYDAL ON MAY MORNING, . 
If with old love of you, dear Hills ! I share 
New love of many a rival image brought 
From far, forgive the wanderings of my thought : 
Nor art thou wronged, sweet May ! when I compare 
Thy present birth-morn with thy last, so fair, 
So rich to me in favours. For my lot 
Then was, within the famed Egerian Grot 
To sit and muse, fanned by its dewy air 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Mingling with thy soft breath ! That morning too, 
Warblers I heard their joy unbosoming 
Amid the sunny, shadowy, Colyseum ; 
Heard them, unchecked by aught of saddening hue, 
For victories there won by flower-crowned Spring, 
Chant in full choir their innocent Te Deum. 

THE PILLAR OF TRAJAN. 
Where towers are crushed, and unforbidden weeds 
O'er mutilated arches shed their seeds ; 
And temples, doomed to milder change, unfold 
A new magnificence that vies with old ; 
Firm in its pristine majesty hath stood 
A votive Column, spared by fire and flood : — 
And, though the passions of man's fretful race 
Have never ceased to eddy round its base, 
Not injured more by touch of meddling hands 
Than a lone obelisk, 'mid Nubian sands, 
Or aught in Syrian deserts left to save 
From death the memory of the good and brave. 
Historic figures round the shaft embost 
Ascend, with lineaments in air not lost : 
Still as he turns, the charmed spectator sees 
Group winding after group with dream-like ease ; 
Triumphs in sunbright gratitude displayed, 
Or softly stealing into modest shade. 
— So, pleased with purple clusters to entwine 
Some lofty elm-tree, mounts the daring vine ; 
The woodbine so, with spiral grace, and breathes 
Wide-spreading odours from her flowery wreaths. 
Borne by the Muse from rills in shepherds' ears 
Murmuring but one smooth story for all years, 
I gladly commune with the mind and heart 
Of him who thus survives by classic art, 
His actions witness, venerate his mien, 
And study Trajan as by Pliny seen ; 
Behold how fought the Chief whose conquering 
sword 
Stretched far as earth might own a single lord ; 

In the delight of moral prudence schooled, 
How feelingly at home the Sovereign ruled ; 
Best of the good — in pagan faith allied 
To more than Man, by virtue deified. 
Memorial Pillar ! 'mid the wrecks of Time 
Preserve thy charge with confidence sublime — 
The exultations, pomps, and cares of Rome, 
Whence half the breathing world x-eceived its doom; 
Things that recoil from language ; that, if shown 
By apter pencil, from the light had flown. 
A Pontiff, Trajan here the Gods implores, 
There greets an Embassy from Indian shores ; 
Lo ! he harangues his cohorts — there the storm 
Of battle meets him in authentic form ! 
Unharnessed, naked, troops of Moorish horse 
Sweep to the charge ; more high, the Dacian force, 
To hoof and finger mailed ; — yet, high or low, 
None bleed, and none lie prostrate but the foe ; 
In every Roman, through all turns of fate, 
Is Roman dignity inviolate ; 
Spirit in him pre-eminent, who guides, 
Supports, adorns, and over all presides ; 
Distinguished only by inherent state 
From honoured Instruments that round him wait; 
Rise as he may, his grandeur scorns the test 
Of outward symbol, nor will deign to rest 
On aught by which another is deprest. 
— Alas ! that One thus disciplined could toil 
To enslave whole nations on their native soil ; 
So emulous of Macedonian fame, 
That, when his age was measured with his aim, 
He drooped, 'mid else unclouded victories, 
And turned his eagles back with deep-drawn sis;lis: 
weakness of the Great ! folly of the Wise ! 
Where now the haughty Empire that was tqmad 
With such fond hope \ her very speech is deat'. ; 
Yet glorious Art the power of Time defies, 
And Trajan still, through various enterprise, 
Mounts, in this fine illusion, toward the skies : 
Still are we present with the imperial Chief, 
Nor cease to gaze upon the bold Relief 
Till Rome, to silent marble unconfined, 
Becomes with all her years a vision of the Mind. 

THE EGYPTIAN MAID. 

 

THE EGYPTIAN MAID; 

THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 
[For the names and persons in the following poem, see the "History of the renowned Prince Arthur and his 
ights of the Round Table ;" for the rest the Author is answerable ; only it may be proper to add, that the Lotus, 
,h the bust of the Goddess appearing to rise out of the full-blown flower, was suggested by the beautiful work of 
j;ient art, once included among the Townley Marbles, and now in the British Museum.] 


While Merlin paced the Cornish sands, 
?orth-looking toward the rocks of Scilly, 
The pleased Enchanter was aware 
|)f a bright Ship that seemed to hang in air, 
ifet was she work of mortal hands, 
d took from men her name — The Water Lily. 
■Soft was the wind, that landward blew ; 
A.nd, as the Moon, o'er some dark hill ascendant, 
jirows from a little edge of light 
To a full orb, this Pinnace bright 
became, as nearer to the coast she drew, 
Ire glorious, with spread sail and streaming 
pendant. 
|Jpon this winged Shape so fair 
page Merlin gazed with admiration : 
ler lineaments, thought he, surpass 
ilught that was ever shown in magic glass ; 
»Vas ever built with patient care ; 
<i, at a touch, produced by happiest transformation. 
^ow, though a Mechanist, whose skill 
shames the degenerate grasp of modern science, 
irave Merlin (and belike the more 
i|ir practising occult and perilous lore) 
iVas subject to a freakish will 
'it sapped good thoughts, or scared them with 
defiance. 
 rovoked to envious spleen, he cast 
!^.n altered look upon the advancing Stranger 
i'Vhom he had hailed with joy, and cried, 
! : My Art shall help to tame her pride — " 
^non the breeze became a blast, 
d the waves rose, and sky portended danger. 

With thrilling word, and potent sign 
Traced on the beach, his work the Sorcerer 
urges ; 
The clouds in blacker clouds are lost, 
Like spiteful Fiends that vanish, crossed 
By Fiends of aspect more malign ; 
And the winds roused the Deep with fiercer 
scourges. 
But worthy of the name she bore 
Was this Sea-flower, this buoyant Galley ; 
Supreme in loveliness and grace 
Of motion, whether in the embrace 
Of trusty anchorage, or scudding o'er 
The main flood roughened into hill and valley. 
Behold, how wantonly she laves 
Her sides, the Wizard's craft confounding ; 
Like something out of Ocean sprung 
To be for ever fresh and young, 
Breasts the sea-flashes, and huge waves 
Top-gallant high, rebounding and rebounding ! 
But Ocean under magic heaves, 
And cannot spare the Thing he cherished : 
Ah ! what avails that she was fair, 
Luminous, blithe, and debonair ? 
The storm has stripped her of her leaves ; 
The Lily floats no longer ! — She hath perished. 
Grieve for her, — she deserves no less ; 
So like, yet so unlike, a living Creature ! 
No heart had she, no busy brain ; 
Though loved, she could not love again; 
Though pitied, feel her own distress ; 
Nor aught that troubles us, the fools of Nature. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Yet is there cause for gushing tears ; 
So richly was this Galley laden, 
A fairer than herself she bore, 
And, in her struggles, cast ashore ; 
A lovely One, who nothing hears 
Of wind or wave — a meek and guileless Maiden. 
Into a cave had Merlin fled 
From mischief, caused by spells himself had 
muttered ; 
And while, repentant all too late, 
In moody posture there he sate, 
He heard a voice, and saw, with half-raised head, 
A Visitant by whom these words were uttered ; 
" On Christian service this frail Bark 
Sailed " (hear me, Merlin !) " under high pro- 
tection, 
Though on her prow a sign of heathen power 
Was carved — a Goddess with a Lily flower, 
The old Egyptian's emblematic mark 
Of joy immortal and of pure affection. 
Her course was for the British strand ; 
Her freight, it was a Damsel peerless ; 
God reigns above, and Spirits strong 
May gather to avenge this wrong 
Done to the Princess, and her Land 
Which she in duty left, sad but not cheerless. 
And to Caerleon's loftiest tower 
Soon will the Knights of Arthur's Table 
A cry of lamentation send ; 
And all will weep who there attend, 
To grace that Stranger's bridal hour, 
For whom the sea was made unnavigable. 
Shame ! should a Child of royal line 
Die through the blindness of thy malice I " 
Thus to the Necromancer spake 
Nina, the Lady of the Lake, 
A gentle Sorceress, and benign, 
Who ne'er embittered any good man's chalice. 
" What boots," continued she, K to mourn \ 
To expiate thy sin endeavour : 
From the bleak isle where she is laid, 
Fetched by our art, the Egyptian Maid 
May yet to Arthur's court be borne 
Cold as she is, ex'e life be fled for ever. 
My pearly Boat, a shining Light, 
That brought me down that sunless river, 
Will bear me on from wave to wave, 
And back with her to this sea-cave ; — 
Then Merlin ! for a rapid flight 
Through air, to thee my Charge will I deliver. 

The very swiftest of thy cars 
Must, when my part is done, be ready ; 
Meanwhile, for further guidance, look 
Into thy own prophetic book ; 
And, if that fail, consult the Stars 
To learn thy course ; farewell ! be prompt and j 
steady." 
This scarcely spoken, she again 
Was seated in her gleaming shallop, 
That, o'er the yet-distempered Deep, 
Pursued its way with bird-like sweep, 
Or like a steed, without a rein, 
Urged o'er the wilderness in sportive gallop. 
Soon did the gentle Nina reach 
That Isle without a house or haven ; 
Landing, she found not what she sought, 
Nor saw of wreck or ruin aught 
But a carved Lotus cast upon the beach 
By the fierce waves, a flower in marble graven. 
Sad relique, but how fair the while ! 
For gently each from each retreating 
With backward curve, the leaves revealed 
The bosom half, and half concealed, 
Of a Divinity, that seemed to smile 
On Nina, as she passed, with hopeful greeting. 
No quest was hers of vague desire, 
Of tortured hope and purpose shaken ; 
Following the margin of a bay, 
She spied the lonely Cast-away, 
Unmarred, unstripped of her attire, 
But with closed eyes, — ofbreathandbloomforsaken. 
Then Nina, stooping down, embraced, 
With tenderness and mild emotion, 
The Damsel, in that trance embound ; 
And, while she raised her from the ground, 
And in the pearly shallop placed, 
Sleep fell upon the air, and stilled the ocean. 
The turmoil hushed, celestial springs 
Of music opened, and there came a blending 
Of fragrance, underived from earth, 
With gleams that owed not to the sun their birth 
And that soft rustling of invisible wings 
Which Angels make, on works of love descending 
And Nina heard a sweeter voice 
Than if the Goddess of the flower had spoken : j 
" Thou hast achieved, fair Dame ! what none 
Less pure in spirit could have done ; 
Go, in thy enterprise rejoice ! 
Air, earth, sea, sky, and heaven, success betoken. 

THE EGYPTIAN MAID. 

 

So cheered, she left that Island bleak, 
A bare- rock of the Scilly cluster ; 
And, as they traversed the smooth brine, 
The self-illumined Brigantine 
Shed, on the Slumberer's cold wan cheek 
ad pallid brow, a melancholy lustre. 
Fleet was their course, and when they came 
To the dim cavern, whence the river 
Issued into the salt-sea flood, 
: Merlin, as fixed in thought he stood, 
Was thus accosted by the Dame ; 
Behold to thee my Charge I now deliver ! 
But where attends thy chariot — where % " — 
Quoth Merlin, " Even as I was bidden, 
So have I done ; as trusty as thy barge 
My vehicle shall prove — precious Charge ! 
•If this be sleep, how soft ! if death, how fair ! 
jch have my books disclosed, but the end is 
hidden." 
He spake ; and gliding into view 
iForth from the grotto's dimmest chamber 
Oame two mute Swans,whose plumes of dusky white 
Changed, as the pair approached the fight, 
Drawing an ebon car, their hue 
ike clouds of sunset) into lucid amber. 
■Once more did gentle Nina lift 
The Princess, passive to all changes : 
The car received her : — then up-went 
[nto the ethereal element 
The Birds with progress smooth and swift 
.. thought, when through bright regions memory 
ranges. 
age Merlin, at the Slumberer's side, 
Instructs the Swans their way to measure ; 
\nd soon Caerleon's towers appeared, 
Ajid notes of minstrelsy were heard 
From rich pavilions spreading wide, 
j . r some high day of long-expected pleasure. 
.^we-stricken stood both Knights and Dames 
Ere on firm ground the car alighted ; 
Eftsoons astonishment was past, - 
For in that face they saw the last 
Last lingering look of clay, that tames 
I. pride ; by which all happiness is blighted. 
laid Merlin, " Mighty King, fair Lords, 
A.way with feast and tilt and tourney ! 
Ve saw, throughout this royal House, 
Ve heard, a rocking marvellous 
Of turrets, and a clash of swords 
tf-shaken, as I closed my airy journey. 

Lo ! by a destiny well known 
To mortals, joy is turned to sorrow; 
This is the wished-for Bride, the Maid 
Of Egypt, from a rock conveyed 
Where she by shipwreck had been thrown ; 
 sight ! but grief may vanish ere the morrow." 
" Though vast thy power, thy words are weak," 
Exclaimed the King, "a mockery hateful ; 
Dutiful Child, her lot how hard ! 
Is this her piety's reward ? 
Those watery locks, that bloodless cheek ! 
winds without remorse \ shore ungrateful ! 
Rich robes are fretted by the moth ; 
Towers, temples, fall by stroke of thunder ; 
Will that, or deeper thoughts, abate 
A Father's sorrow for her fate ? 
He will repent him of his troth ; 
His brain will burn, his stout heart split asunder. 
Alas ! and I have caused this woe ; 
For, when my prowess from invading Neighbours 
Had freed his Realm, he plighted word 
That he would turn to Christ our Lord, 
And his dear Daughter on a Knight bestow 
Whom I should choose for love and matchless 
labours. 
Her birth was heathen ; but a fence 
Of holy Angels round her hovered : 
A Lady added to my court 
So fair, of such divine report 
And worship, seemed a recompense 
For fifty kingdoms by my sword recovered. 
Ask not for whom, Champions true ! 
She was reserved by me her life's betrayer ; 
She who was meant to be a bride 
Is now a corse : then put aside 
Vain thoughts, and speed ye, with observance due 
Of Christian rites, in Christian ground to lay her." 
"The tomb," said Merlin, "may not close 
Upon her yet, earth hide her beauty ; 
Not froward to thy sovereign will 
Esteem me, Liege ! if I, whose skill 
Wafted her hither, interpose 
To check this pious haste of erring duty. 
My books command me to lay bare 
The secret thou art bent on keeping : 
Here must a high attest be given, 
What Bridegroom was for her ordained by 
Heaven : 
And in my glass significants there are 
Of things that may to gladness turn this weeping. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

For this, approaching, One hy One, 
Thy Knights must touch the cold hand of the 
Virgin; 
So, for the favoured One, the Flower may bloom 
Once more : but, if unchangeable her doom, 
If life departed be for ever gone, 
Some blest assurance, from this cloud emerging, 
May teach him to bewail his loss ; 
Not with a grief that, like a vapour, rises 
And melts ; but grief devout that shall endure, 
And a perpetual growth secure 
Of purposes which no false thought shall cross, 
A harvest of high hopes and noble enterprises." 
"So be it," said the King ; — "anon, 
Here, where the Princess lies, begin the trial ; 
Knights each in order as ye stand 
Step forth." — To touch the pallid hand 
Sir Agravaine advanced ; no sign he won 
From Heaven or earth ; — Sir Kaye had like denial. 
Abashed, Sir Dinas turned away ; 
Even for Sir Percival was no disclosure ; 
Though he, devoutest of all Champions, ere 
He reached that ebon car, the bier 
Whereon diffused like snow the Damsel lay, 
Full thrice had crossed himself in meek composure. 
Imagine (but ye Saints ! who can V) 
How in still air the balance trembled — 
The wishes, peradventure the despites 
That overcame some not ungenerous Knights ; 
And all the thoughts that lengthened out a span 
Of time to Lords and Ladies thus assembled. 
What patient confidence was here ! 
And there how many bosoms panted ! 
While drawing toward the car Sir Gawaine, mailed 
For tournament, his beaver vailed, 
And softly touched ; but, to his princely cheer 
And high expectancy, no sign was granted. 
Next, disencumbered of his harp, 
Sir Tristram, dear to thousands as a brother, 
Came to the proof, nor grieved that there ensued 
No change ; — the fair Izonda he had wooed 
With love too true, a love with pangs too sharp, 
From hope too distant, not to dread another. 
Not so Sir Launcelot ; — from Heaven's grace 
A sign he craved, tired slave of vain contrition ; 
The royal Guinever looked passing glad 
When his touch failed. — Next came Sir Galahad ; 
He paused, and stood entranced by that still face 
Whose features he had seen in noontide vision. 

For late, as near a murmuring stream 
He rested 'mid an arbour green and shady, 
Nina, the good Enchantress, shed 
A fight around his mossy bed ; 
And, at her call, a waking dream 
Prefigured to his sense the Egyptian Lady. 
Now, while his bright-haired front he bowed, 
And stood, far-kenned by mantle furred witli 
ermine, 
As o'er the insensate Body hung 
The enrapt, the beautiful, the young, 
Belief sank deep into the crowd 
That he the solemn issue would determine. 
Nor deem it strange ; the Youth had worn 
That very mantle on a day of glory, 
The day when he achieved that matchless feat, 
The marvel of the Perilous Seat, 
Which whosoe'er approached of strength wa 
shorn, 
Though King or Knight the most renowned in ston 
He touched with hesitating hand — 
And lo ! those Birds, far-famed through Love' 
dominions, 
The Swans, in triumph clap their wings ; 
And their necks play, involved in rings, 
Like sinless snakes in Eden's happy land ; — 
"Mine is she," cried the Knight; — again the;,; 
clapped their pinions. 
" Mine was she — mine she is, though dead, 
And to her name my soul shall cleave in sorrow ; 
Whereat, a tender twilight streak 
Of colour dawned upon the Damsel's cheek ; 
And her lips, quickening with uncertain red, 
Seemed from each other a faint warmlh to horrov 
Deep was the awe, the rapture high, 
Of love emboldened, hope with dread entwinin 
When, to the mouth, relenting Death 
Allowed a soft and flower-like breath, 
Precursor to a timid sigh, 
To lifted eyelids, and a doubtful shining. 
In silence did King Arthur gaze 
Upon the signs that pass away or tarry ; 
In silence watched the gentle strife 
Of Nature leading back to life ; 
Then eased his soul at length by praise 
Of God, and Heaven's pure Queen — the bliasf 
Mary. 

THE RIVER DUDDON. 

 


Then said he, " Take her to thy heart, 
jSir Galahad ! a treasure, that God giveth, 
(Bound by indissoluble ties to thee 
iThrough mortal change and immortality ; 
jBe happy and unenvied, thou who art 
goodly Knight that hath no peer that liveth ! ' 
;Not long the Nuptials were delayed ; 
[And sage tradition still rehearses 
The pomp, the glory of that hour 
(When toward the altar from her bower 
iKing Arthur led the Egyptian Maid, 
lid Angels carolled these far-echoed verses ; — 
Who shrinks not from alliance 
Of evil with good Powers, 
To God proclaims defiance, 
And mocks whom he adores. 
A Ship to Christ devoted 
From the Land of Nile did go ; 
Alas ! the bright Ship floated, 
An Idol at her prow. 

By magic domination, 
The Heaven-permitted vent 
Of purblind mortal passion, 
Was wrought her punishment. 

The Flower, the Form within it, 
What served they in her need ? 
Her port she could not win it, 
Nor from mishap be freed. 
The tempest overcame her, 
And she was seen no more ; 
But gently, gently blame her — 
She cast a Pearl ashore. 
The Maid to Jesu hearkened, 
And kept to him her faith, 
Till sense in death was darkened, 
Or sleep akin to death. 
But Angels round her pillow 
Kept watch, a viewless band ; 
And, billow favouring billow, 
She reached the destined strand. 
Blest Pair ! whate'er befal you, 
Your faith in Him approve 
Who from frail earth can call you 
To bowers of endless love ! 

THE RIVER- DUDDON. 

A SERIES OF SONNETS. 

The River Duddon rises upon Wrynose Fell, on the confines of Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Lancashire ; 
nd, having served as a boundary to the two last counties for the space of about twenty-five miles, enters the Irish 
ea, between the Isle of Walney and the Lordship of Milium. 

TO THE REV. DR. WORDSWORTH. 
(WITH THE SONNETS TO THE RIVER DUDDON, AND OTHER POEMS IN THIS COLLECTION, ]£ 

The Minstrels played their Christmas tune 
To-night beneath my cottage-eaves ; 
While, smitten by a lofty moon, 
The encircling laurels, thick with leaves, 
Gave back a rich and dazzling sheen, 
That overpowered their natural green. 
Through hill and valley every breeze 
Had sunk to rest with folded wings : 
Keen was the air, but could not freeze, 
Nor check, the music of the strings ; 
So Btout and hardy were the band 
That scraped the chords with strenuous hand ! 

And who but listened ? — till was paid 
Respect to every Inmate's claim : 
The greeting given, the music played, 
In honour of each household name, 
Duly pronounced with lusty call, 
And ' merry Christmas ' wished to all ! 
O Brother ! I revere the choice 
That took thee from thy native hills ; 
And it is given thee to rejoice • 
Though public care full often tills 
(Heaven only witness of the toil) 
A barren and ungrateful soil. 



 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Yet, would that Thou, with me and mine, 
Hadst heard this never-failing rite ; 
And seen on other faces shine 
A true revival of the light 
Which Nature and these rustic Powers, 
In simple childhood, spread through ours ! 
For pleasure hath not ceased to wait 
On these expected annual rounds ; 
Whether the rich man's sumptuous gate 
Call forth the unelaborate sounds, 
Or they are offered at the door 
That guards the lowliest of the poor. 
How touching, when, at midnight, sweep 
Snow-muffled winds, and all is dark, 
To hear— and sink again to sleep ! 
Or, at an earlier call, to mark, 
By blazing fire, the still suspense 
Of self-complacent innocence ; 
The mutual nod,— the grave disguise 
Of hearts with gladness brimming o'er ; 
And some unbidden tears that rise 
For names once heard, and heard no more ; 
Tears brightened by the serenade 
For infant in the cradle laid. 
Ah ! not for emerald fields alone, 
With ambient streams more pure and bright 
Than fabled Cytherea's zone 

Glittering before the Thunderer's sight, 
Is to my heart of hearts endeared 
The ground where we were born and reared ! 
Hail, ancient Manners ! sure defence, 
Where they survive, of wholesome lawB ; 
Remnants of love whose modest sense 
Thus into narrow room withdraws ; 
Hail, Usages of pristine mould, 
And ye that guard them, Mountains old ! 
Bear with me, Brother ! quench the thought 
That slights this passion, or condemns ; 
If thee fond Fancy ever brought 
From the proud margin of the Thames, 
And Lambeth's venerable towers, 
To humbler streams, and greener bowers. 
Yes, they can make, who fail to find, 
Short leisure even in busiest days ; 
Moments, to cast a look behind, 
And profit by those kindly rays 
That through the clouds do sometimes steal, 
And all the far-off past reveal. 
Hence, while the imperial City's din 
Beats frequent on thy satiate ear, 
A pleased attention I may win 
To agitations less severe, 
That neither overwhelm nor cloy, 
But fill the hollow vale with joy ! 

Not envying Latian shades — if yet they throw 
A grateful coolness round that crystal Spring, 
Blandusia, prattling as when long ago 
The Sabine Bard was moved her praise to sing ; 
Careless of flowers that in perennial blow 
Round the moist marge of Persian fountains cling; 
Heedless of Alpine torrents thundering 
Through ice-built arches radiant as heaven's bow ; 
 seek the birth-place of a native Stream. — 
All hail, ye mountains ! hail, thou morning light ! 
Better to breathe at large on this clear height 
Than toil in needless sleep from dream to dream : 
Pure flow the verse, pure, vigorous, free, and bright, 
For Duddon, long-loved Duddon, is my theme ! 

Child of the clouds ! remote from every taint 
Of sordid industry thy lot is cast ; 
Thine are the honours of the lofty waste ; 
Not seldom, when with heat the valleys faint, 
Thy handmaid Frost with spangled tissue quaint 
Thy cradle decks ; — to chant thy birth, thou hast 
No meaner Poet than the whistling Blast, 
And Desolation is thy Patron-saint! 

She guards thee, ruthless Power ! who would n< 
spare 
Those mighty forests, once the bison's screen, 
Where stalked the huge deer to his shaggy lair 
Through paths and alleys roofed with darkest greei 
Thousands of years before the silent air 
Was pierced by whizzing shaft of hunter keen i 

How shall I paint thee ? — Be this naked stone 
My seat, while I give way to such intent ; 
Pleased could my verse, a speaking monument, 
Make to the eyes of men thy features known. 
But as of all those tripping lambs not one 
Outruns his fellows, so hath Nature lent 
To thy beginning nought that doth present 
Peculiar ground for hope to build upon. 
To dignify the spot that gives thee birth, 
No sign of hoar Antiquity's esteem 
Appears, and none of modern Fortune's care ; 
Yet thou thyself hast round thee shed a gieam 
Of brilliant moss, instinct with freshness rare ; 
Prompt offering to thy Foster-mother, Earth ! 
 The deer alluded to is the Leigh, a gigantic spcci 
long since extinct. 

THE RIVER DUDDON. 

 


ike, cradled Nursling of the mountain, take 
lis parting glance, no negligent adieu ! 
Protean change seems wrought while I pursue 
le curves, a loosely-scattered chain doth make ; 
\ rather thou appear'st a glistering snake, 
lent, and to the gazer's eye untrue, 
jiridding with sinuous lapse the rushes, through 
jtvarf willows gliding, and by ferny brake, 
larts from a dizzy steep the undaunted Rill 
:abed instantly in garb of snow-white foam ; 
!ad laughing dare the Adventurer, who hath clomb 
 high, a rival purpose to fulfil ; 
ise let the dastard backward wend, and roam, 
Peking less bold achievement, where he will ! 

;>le listener, Duddon ! to the breeze that played 
lith thy clear voice, I caught the fitful sound 
''afted o'er sullen moss and craggy mound — 
jafruitful solitudes, that seemed to upbraid 
lie sun in heaven ! — but now, to form a shade 
>r Thee, green alders have together wound 
lieir foliage ; ashes flung their arms around ; 
ad birch-trees risen in silver colonnade, 
ad thou hast also tempted here to rise, 
ilid sheltering pines, this Cottage rude and grey ; 
hose ruddy children, by the mother's eyes 
tirelessly watched, sport through the summer day, 
ly pleased associates : — light as endless May 
infant bosoms lonely Nature lies. 

aE yet our course was graced with social trees 
lacked not old remains of hawthorn bowers, 
f 'here small birds warbled to their paramours ; 
lad, earlier still, was heard the hum of bees ; 
;saw them ply their harmless robberies, 
ad caught the fragrance which the sundry flowers, 
■d by the stream with soft perpetual showers, 
enteously yielded to the vagrant breeze. 
^iere bloomed the strawberry of the wilderness ; 
be trembling eyebright showed her sapphire blue, 
jie thyme her purple, like the blush of Even ; 
tad if the breath of some to no caress 
jivited, forth they peeped so fair to view, 
fi kinds alike seemed favourites of Heaven. 

" Change me, some God, into that breathing rose!" 
The love-sick Stripling fancifully sighs, 
The envied flower beholding, as it lies 
On Laura's breast, in exquisite repose ; 
Or he would pass into her bird, that throws 
The darts of song from out its wiry cage ; 
Enraptured, — could he for himself engage 
The thousandth part of what the Nymph bestows ; 
And what the little careless innocent 
Ungraciously receives. Too daring choice ! 
There are whose calmer mind it would content 
To be an unculled floweret of the glen, 
Fearless of plough and scythe ; or darkling wren 
That tunes on Duddon's banks her slender voice. 

"What aspect bore the Man who roved or fled, 
First of his tribe, to this dark dell — who first 
In this pellucid Current slaked his thirst  
What hopes came with him ? what designs were 
spread 
Along his path ? His unprotected bed [nursed 
What dreams encompassed? Was the intruder 
In hideous usages, and rites accursed, 
That thinned the living and disturbed the dead ? 
No voice replies ; — both air and earth are mute ; 
And Thou, blue Streamlet, murmuring yield'st no 
more 
Than a soft record, that, whatever fruit 
Of ignorance thou might'st witness heretofore, 
Thy function was to heal and to restore, 
To soothe and cleanse, not madden and pollute ! 

THE STEPPING-STONES. 
The struggling Rill insensibly is grown 
Into a Brook of loud and stately march, 
Crossed ever and anon by plank or arch ; 
And, for like use, lo ! what might seem a zone 
Chosen for ornament — stone matched with stone 
In studied symmetry, with interspace 
For the clear waters to pursue their race 
Without restraint. How swiftly have they flown, 
Succeeding — still succeeding ! Here the Child 
Puts, when the high-swoln Flood runs fierce and 
wild, 
His budding courage to the proof ; and here 
Declining Manhood learns to note the sly 
And sure encroachments of infirmity, 
Thinking how fast time runs, life's end how near ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE SAME SUBJECT. 
Not so that Pair whose youthful spirits dance 
With prompt emotion, urging them to pass ; 
A sweet confusion checks the Shepherd-lass ; 
Blushing she eyes the dizzy flood askance ; 
To stop ashamed — too timid to advance ; 
She ventures once again — another pause ! 
His outstretched hand He tauntingly withdraws — 
She sues for help with piteous utterance ! 
Chidden she chides again ; the thrilling touch 
Both feel, when he renews the wished-for aid : 
Ah ! if their fluttering hearts should stir too much, 
Should heat too strongly, both may be betrayed. 
The frolic Loves, who, from yon high rock, see 
The struggle, clap their wings for victory ! 

THE FAERY CHASM. 
No fiction was it of the antique age : 
A sky-blue stone, within this sunless cleft, 
Is of the very foot-marks unbereft 
Which tiny Elves impressed ; — on that smooth stage 
Dancing with all their brilliant equipage 
In secret revels — haply after theft 
Of some sweet Babe — Flower stolen, and coarse 
Weed left 
For the distracted Mother to assuage 
Her grief with, as she might ! — But, where, oh ! 
Is traceable a vestige of the notes [where 
That ruled those dances wild in character ? — 
Deep underground I Or in the upper air, 
On the shrill wind of midnight ? or where floats 
O'er twilight fields the autumnal gossamer ? 

HINTS FOR THE FANCY. 
On, loitering Muse — the swift Stream chides us — 
Albeit his deep-worn channel doth immure [on ! 
Objects immense portrayed in miniature, 
Wild shapes for many a strange comparison ! 
Niagaras, Alpine passes, and anon 
Abodes of Naiads, calm abysses pure, 
Bright liquid mansions, fashioned to endure 
When the broad oak drops, a leafless skeleton, 
And the solidities of mortal pride, 
Palace and tower, are crumbled into dust ! — 
The Bard who walks with Duddon for his guide, 
Shall find such toys of fancy thickly set : 
Turn from the sight, enamoured Muse — -we must ; 
And, if thou canst, leave them without regret ! 

OPEN PROSPECT. 
Hail to the fields — with Dwellings sprinkled o'er 
And one small hamlet, under a green hill 
Clustering, with barn and byre, and spouting mill ! 
A glance suffices ; — should we wish for more, 
Gay June would scorn us. But when bleak winds 
roar 
Through the stiff lance-like shoots of pollard ash, 
Dread swell of sound ! loud as the gusts that lash 
The matted forests of Ontario's shore 
By wasteful steel unsmitten — then would I 
Turn into port ; and, reckless of the gale, 
Reckless of angry Duddon sweeping by, 
While the warm hearth exalts the mantling ale, 
Laugh with the generous household heartily 
At all the merry pranks of Donnerdale ! 

mountain Stream ! the Shepherd and his Cot 
Are privileged Inmates of deep solitude ; 
Nor would the nicest Anchorite exclude 
A field or two of brighter green, or plot 
Of tillage-ground, that seemeth like a spot 
Of stationary sunshine : — thou hast viewed 
These only, Duddon ! with their paths renewed 
By fits and starts, yet this contents thee not. 
Thee hath some awful Spirit impelled to leave, 
Utterly to desert, the haunts of men, 
Though simple thy companions were and few ; 
And through this wilderness a passage cleave 
Attended but by thy own voice, save when 
The clouds and fowls of the air thy way pursue ! 

From this deep chasm, where quivering sunbeam! 
play 
Upon its loftiest crags, mine eyes behold 
A gloomy niche, capacious, blank, and cold ; 
A concave free from shrubs and mosses grey ; 
In semblance fresh, as if, with dire affray, 
Some Statue, placed amid these regions old 
For tutelary service, thence had rolled, 
Startling the flight of timid Yesterday ! 
Was it by mortals sculptured ? — weary slaves 
Of slow endeavour ! or abruptly cast 
Into rude shape by fire, with roaring blast 
Tempestuously let loose from central caves ? 
Or fashioned by the turbulence of waves, 
Then, when o'er highest hills the Deluge pass'd ? 

THE RIVER DUDDON. 

 

AMERICAN TRADITION. 
jch fruitless questions may not long beguile 
[r plague the fancy 'mid the sculptured shows 
mspicuous yet where Oroonoko flows ; 
fiere would the Indian answer with a smile 
;imed at the White Man's ignorance the while, 
F the Great Waters telling how they rose, 
jivered the plains, and, wandering where they 
iounted through every intricate defile, [chose, 
I'iumphant. — Inundation wide and deep, 
er which his Fathers urged, to ridge and steep 
se unapproachable, their buoyant way ; 
-id carved, on mural cliff's undreaded side, 
In, moon, and stars, and beast of chase or prey ; 
hate'er they sought, shunned, loved, or deified ! 

RETURN. 
dark plume fetch me from yon blasted yew, 
Jirched on whose top the Danish Raven croaks ; 
joft, the imperial Bird of Rome invokes 
^parted ages, shedding where he flew 
wse fragments of wild wailing, that bestrew 
«e clouds and thrill the chambers of the rocks ; 
id into silence hush the timorous flocks, 
'at, calmly couching while the nightly dew 
listened each fleece, beneath the twinkling stars 
;pt amid that lone Camp on Hardknot's height , 
ihose Guardians bent the knee to Jove and Mars : 
L near that mystic Round of Druid frame 
Irdily sinking by its proper weight 
|ep into patient Earth, from whose smooth breast 
it came ! 

SEATHWAITE CHAPEL. 
Iicred Religion ! ' mother of form and fear,' 
ead arbitress of mutable respect, 
w rites ordaining when the old are wrecked, 
' cease to please the fickle worshipper ; 
other of Love ! (that name best suits thee here) 
other of Love ! for this deep vale, protect 
ith's holy lamp, pure source of bright effect, 
( : ted to purge the vapoury atmosphere 
I at seeks to stifle it ;— as in those days 
'|ien this low Pile J a Gospel Teacher knew, 
lose good works formed an endless retinue : 
Pastor such as Chaucer's verse pourtrays ; 
:h as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew ; 
d tender Goldsmith crowned with deathless 
praise ! 
 See Humboldt's Personal Narrative. 
t See Note. j See Note. 

TRIBUTARY STREAM. 
My frame hath often trembled with delight 
When hope presented some far-distant good, 
That seemed from heaven descending, like the flood 
Of yon pure waters, from their aery height 
Hurrying, with lordly Duddon to unite ; 
Who, 'mid a world of images imprest 
On the calm depth of his transparent breast, 
Appears to cherish most that Torrent white, 
The fairest, softest, liveliest of them all ! 
And seldom hath ear listened to a tune 
More lulling than the busy hum of Noon, 
Swoln by that voice — whose murmur musical 
Announces to the thirsty fields a boon 
Dewy and fresh, till showers again shall fail. 

THE PLAIN OF DONNERDALE. 
The old inventive Poets, had they seen, 
Or rather felt, the entrancement that detains 
Thy waters, Duddon ! 'mid these flowery plains ; 
The still repose, the liquid lapse serene, 
Transferred to bowers imperishably green, 
Had beautified Elysium ! But these chains 
Will soon be broken ; — a rough course remains, 
Rough as the past ; where Thou, of placid mien, 
Innocuous as a firstling of the flock, 
And countenanced like a soft cerulean sky, 
Shalt change thy temper ; and, with many a shock 
Given and received in mutual jeopardy, 
Dance, like a Bacchanal, from rock to rock, 
Tossing her frantic thyrsus wide and high ! 

Whence that low voice ? — A whisper from the heart, 
That told of days long past, when here I roved 
With friends and kindred tenderly beloved ; 
Some who had early mandates to depart, 
Yet are allowed to steal my path athwart 
By Duddon's side ; once more do we unite, 
Once more beneath the kind Earth's tranquil light ; 
And smothered joys into new being start. 
From her unworthy seat, the cloudy stall 
Of Time, breaks forth triumphant Memory ; 
Her glistening tresses bound, yet light and free 
As golden locks of birch, that rise and fall 
On gales that breathe too gently to recal 
Aught of the fading year's inclemency ! 

P 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 


TRADITION. 
A love-lorn Maid, at some far-distant time, 
Came to this hidden pool, whose depths surpass 
In crystal clearness Dian's looking-glass ; 
And, gazing, saw that Rose, which from the prime 
Derives its name, reflected as the chime 
Of echo doth reverberate some sweet sound : 
The starry treasure from the blue profound 
She longed to ravish ; — shall she plunge, or climb 
The humid precipice, and seize the guest 
Of April, smiling high in upper air % 
Desperate alternative ! what fiend could dare 
To prompt the thought ? — Upon the steep rock's 
breast 
The lonely Primrose yet renews its bloom, 
Untouched memento of her hapless doom ! 

SHEEP-WASHING. 
Sad thoughts, avaunt ! — partake we their blithe 
cheer 
Who gathered in betimes the unshorn flock 
To wash the fleece, where haply bands of rock, 
Checking the stream, make a pool smooth and clear 
As this we look on. Distant Mountains hear, 
Hear and repeat, the turmoil that unites 
Clamour of boys with innocent despites 
Of barking dogs, and bleatings from strange fear. 
And what if Duddon's spotless flood receive 
Unwelcome mixtures as the uncouth noise 
Thickens, the pastoral River will forgive 
Such wrong ; nor need we blame the licensed joys, 
Though false to Nature's quiet equipoise : 
Frank are the sports, the stains are fugitive. 

THE RESTING-PLACE. 
Mid-noon is past ; — upon the sultry mead 
No zephyr breathes, no cloud its shadow throws : 
If we advance unstrengthened by repose, 
Farewell the solace of the vagrant reed ! 
This Nook — with woodbine hung and straggling 
Tempting recess as ever pilgrim chose, [weed, 
Half grot, half arbour — proffers to enclose 
Body and mind, from molestation freed, 
In narrow compass — narrow as itself: 
Or if the Fancy, too industrious Elf, 
Be loth that we should breathe awhile exempt 
From new incitements friendly to our task, 
Here wants not stealthy prospect, that may tempt 
Loose Idless to forego her wily mask. 

Methinks 'twere no unprecedented feat 
Should some benignant Minister of air 
Lift, and encircle with a cloudy chair, 
The One for whom my heart shall ever beat 
With tenderest love ; — or, if a safer seat 
Atween his downy wings be furnished, there 
Would lodge her, and the cherished burden bear 
O'er hill and valley to this dim retreat ! 
Rough ways my steps have trod ; — too rough and 
long 
For her companionship ; here dwells soft ease : 
With sweets that she partakes not some distaste 
Mingles, and lurking consciousness of wrong ; 
Languish the flowers ; the waters seem to waste 
Their vocal charm ; their sparklings cease to please. 

Return, Content ! for fondly I pursued, 
Even when a child, the Streams — unheard, unseen 
Through tangled woods, impending rocks between 
Or, free as air, with flying inquest viewed 
The sullen reservoirs whence their bold brood- 
Pure as the morning, fretful, boisterous, keen, 
Green as the salt-sea billows, white and green- 
Poured down the hills, a choral multitude ! 
Nor have I tracked their course for scanty gair.s ; 
They taught me random cares and truant joys, 
That shield from mischief and preserve from stain' 
Vague minds, while men are growing out of boys 
Maturer Fancy owes to their rough noise 
Impetuous thoughts that brook not servile reins. 

Fallen, and diffused into a shapeless heap, 
Or quietly self-buried in earth's mould, 
Is that embattled House, whose massy Keep 
Flung from yon cliff a shadow large and cold. 
There dwelt the gay, the bountiful, the bold ; 
Till nightly lamentations, like the sweep 
Of winds — though winds were silent— struck a dee; 
And lasting terror through that ancient Hold. 
Its line of Warriors fled ; — they shrunk when trie 
By ghostly power : — but Time's unsparing hand 
Hath plucked such foes, like weeds, from out tli 
land; 
And now, if men with men in peace abide, 
All other strength the weakest may withstand, 
All worse assaults may safely be defied. 

THE RIVER DUDDON. 

 

JOURNEY RENEWED. 
I rose while yet the cattle, heat-opprest, 
Irowded together under rustling trees 
lirushed by the current of the water-breeze ; 
A nd for their sakes, and love of all that rest, 
in Duddon's margin, in the sheltering nest ; 
'or all the startled scaly tribes that slink 
t'ato his coverts, and each fearless link 
|if dancing insects forged upon his breast ; 
for these, and hopes and recollections worn 
lose to the vital seat of human clay ; 
I lad meetings, tender parting, that iipstay 
[he drooping mind of absence, by vows sworn 
p his pure presence near the trysting thorn — 
; thanked the Leader of my onward way. 

o record tells of lance opposed to lance, 
torse charging horse, 'mid these retired domains ; 
i ells that their turf drank purple from the veins 
If heroes, fallen, or struggling to advance, 
iill doubtful combat issued in a trance 
K victory, that struck through heart and reins 
>en to the inmost seat of mortal pains, 
'nd lightened o'er the pallid countenance. 
let, to the loyal and the brave, who lie 
'i the blank earth, neglected and forlorn, 
the passing Winds memorial tribute pay ; 
he Torrents chant their praise, inspiring scorn 
;f power usurped ; with proclamation high, 
,nd glad acknowledgment, of lawful sway. 

/ho swerves from innocence, who makes divorce 
I that serene companion — a good name, 
ecovers not his loss ; hut walks with shame, 
th doubt, with fear, and haply with remorse : 
ud oft-times he — who, yielding to the force 
f chance-temptation, ere his journey end, 
com chosen comrade turns, or faithful friend — 
; vain shall rue the broken intercourse. 
ot so with such as loosely wear the chain 
lat binds them, pleasant River ! to thy side : — 
irough the rough copse wheel thou with hasty 
stride ; 
ehoose to saunter o'er the grassy plain, 
ire, when the separation has been tried, 
pat we, who part in love, shall meet again. 

The Kirk of Ulpha to the pilgrim's eye 
Is welcome as a star, that doth present 
Its shining forehead through the peaceful rent 
Of a black cloud diffused o'er half the sky : 
Or as a fruitful palm-tree towering high 
O'er the parched waste beside an Arab's tent ; 
Or the Indian tree whose branches, downward bent, 
Take root again, a boundless canopy. 
How sweet were leisure ! could it yield no more 
Than 'mid that wave- washed Church-yard to recline, 
From pastoral graves extracting thoughts divine ; 
Or there to pace, and mark the summits hoar 
Of distant moon-lit mountains faintly shine, 
Soothed by the unseen River's gentle roar. 

Not hurled precipitous from steep to steep ; 
Lingering no more 'mid flower-enamelled lands 
And blooming thickets ; nor by rocky hands 
Held ; but in radiant progress toward the Deep 
Where mightiest rivers into powerless sleep 
Sink, and forget their nature — now expands 
Majestic Duddon, over smooth flat sands 
Gliding in silence with unfettered sweep ! 
Beneath an ampler sky a region wide 
Is opened round him : — hamlets, towers, and towns, 
And blue-topped hills, behold him from afar ; 
In stately mien to sovereign Thames allied 
Spreading his bosom under Kentish downs, 
With commerce freighted, or triumphant war. 

CONCLUSION. 
But here no cannon thunders to the gale ; 
Upon the wave no haughty pendants cast 
A crimson splendour : lowly is the mast 
That rises here, and humbly spread, the sail ; 
While, less disturbed than in the narrow Vale 
Through which with strange vicissitudes he passed, 
The Wanderer seeks that receptacle vast 
Where all his unambitious functions fail. 
And may thy Poet, cloud-born Stream ! be free — ■ 
The sweets of earth contentedly resigned, 
And each tumultuous working left behind 
At seemly distance — to advance like Thee ; 
Prepared, in peace of heart, in calm of mind 
And soul, to mingle with Eternity ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

XXXIV. 
AFTER-THOUGHT. 
/ thought of Thee, my partner and my guide, 
As being past away. — Vain sympathies! 
Fur, backward, Duddon ! as I cast my eyes, 
I see what was, and is, and will abide ; 
Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide ; 
The Form remains, the Function never dies ; 

While vie, the brave, the mighty, and the wise, 
We Men, who in our mom of youth defied 
The elements, must vanish; — be it so! 
Enough, if something from our hands have power 
To live, and act, and serve the future hour ; 
A nd if, as toward the silent tomb we go, 
Tlirough love, through hope, and faith's transcendent 
dower, 
We feel that we are greater than we Tcnow. 

THE WHITE DOE OF EYLSTONE; 
OR, 
THE FATE OF THE NORTONS. 
ADVERTISEMENT. 
During the Summer of ,  visited, for the first time, the beautiful country that surrounds Bolton Priory, 
in Yorkshire ; and the Poem of the White Dob, founded upon a Tradition connected with that place, was composed 
at the close of the same year. 
DEDICATION. 

In trellised shed with clustering roses gay, 
And, Mary ! oft beside our blazing fire, 
When years of wedded life were as a day 
Whose current answers to the heart's desire, 
Did we together read in Spenser's Lay 
How Una, sad of soul — in sad attire, 
The gentle Una, of celestial birth, 
To seek her Knight went wandering o'er the earth. 
Ah, then, Beloved ! pleasing was the smart, 
And the tear precious in compassion shed 
For Her, who, pierced by sorrow's thrilling dart, 
Did meekly bear the pang unmerited ; 
Meek as that emblem of her lowly heart 
The milk-white Lamb which in a line she led, — 
And faithful, loyal in her innocence, 
Like the brave Lion slain in her defence. 
Notes could we hear as of a faery shell 
Attuned to words with sacred wisdom fraught; 
Free Fancy prized each specious miracle, 
And all its finer inspiration caught ; 
Till in the bosom of our rustic Cell, 
We by a lamentable change were taught 
That ' bliss with mortal Man may not abide : ' 
How nearly joy and sorrow are allied ! 
For us the stream of fiction ceased to flow, 
For us the voice of melody was mute. 
— But, as soft gales dissolve the dreary snow, 
And give the timid herbage leave to shoot, 


Heaven's breathing influence failed not to bestow 
A timely promise of unlooked-for fruit, 
Fair fruit of pleasure and serene content 
From blossoms wild of fancies innocent. 
It soothed us — it beguiled us — then, to hear 
Once more of troubles wrought by magic spell ; 
And griefs whose aery motion comes not near 
The pangs that tempt the Spirit to rebel : 
Then, with mild Una in her sober cheer, 
High over hill and low adown the dell 
Again we wandered, willing to partake 
All that she suffered for her dear Lord's sake. 
Then, too, this Song of mine once more could please, 
Where anguish, strange as dreams of restless leep, 
Is tempered and allayed by sympathies 
Aloft ascending, and descending deep, 
Even to the inferior Kinds ; whom forest-trees 
Protect from beating sunbeams, and the sweep 
Of the sharp winds ;— fair Creatures !— to whom RmtW 
A calm and sinless life, with love, hath given. 
This tragic Story cheered us ; for it speaks 
Of female patience winning firm repose ; 
And, of the recompense that conscience seeks, 
A bright, encouraging, example shows ; 
Needful when o'er wide realms the tempest breaks, 
Needful amid life's ordinary woes; — 
Hence, not for them unfitted who would bless 
A happy hour with holier happiness. 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

; [e serves the Muses erriDgly and ill, 
Vhose aim is pleasure light and fugitive : 
i , that my mind were equal to fulfil 
:he comprehensive mandate which they give — 
! Kydaj, Mount, Westmoreland, 
April , . 

 Action is transitory — a step, a blow, 
The motion of a muscle — this way or that — 
'Tis done ; and in the after-vacancy 
We wonder at ourselves like men betrayed : 
Suffering is permanent, obscure and dark, 
And has the nature of infinity. 
Yet through that darkness (infinite though it seem 

| They that deny a God, destroy Man's nobility : for 
certainly Man is of kinn to the Beast by his Body; 
and if he be not of kinn to God by his Spirit, he is a 
base ignoble Creature. It destroys likewise Magna- 
nimity, and the raising of humane Nature : for take an 
example of a Dogg, and mark what a generosity and 
I courage he will put on, when he finds himself main- 
|tained by a Man, who to him is instead of a God, or 
Melior Natura. Which courage is manifestly such, as 
'that Creature without that confidence of a better 
■ Nature than his own could never attain. So Man, when 
I he resteth and assureth himself upon Divine protection 
;and favour, gathereth a force and faith which human 
iNature in itself could not obtain." 
Lord Bacon. 
CANTO FKST. 
> From Bolton's old monastic tower 
; The bells ring loud with gladsome power; 
The sun shines bright ; the fields are gay 
, With people in their best array 
i Of stole and doublet, hood and scai-f, 
Along the banks of crystal Wharf, 
 Through the Vale retired and lowly, 
| Trooping to that summons holy. 
And, up among the moorlands, see 
! What sprinklings of blithe company ! 
Of lasses and of shepherd grooms, 
s That down the steep hills force their way, 
, Like cattle through the budded brooms ; 
: Path, or no path, what care they  
And thus in joyous mood they hie 
' To Bolton's mouldering Priory. 
What would they there ] — Full fifty years 
That sumptuous Pile, with all its peers, 
Too harshly hath been doomed to taste 
The bitterness of wrong and waste : 
Its courts are ravaged; but the tower 
j Is standing with a voice of power, 

Vain aspiration of an earnest will ! 
Yet in this moral Strain a power may live, 
Beloved Wife ! such solace to impart 
As it hath yielded to thy tender heart. 

Andirremoveable) gracious openings lie, 
By which the soul— with patient steps of thought 
Now toiling, wafted now on wings of prayer 
May pass in hope, and, though from mortal bonds 
Yet undelivered, rise with sure ascent 
Even to the fountain-head of peace divine.' 

That ancient voice which wont to call 
To mass or some high festival ; 
And in the shattered fabric's heart 
Remaineth one protected part ; 
A Chapel, like a wild-bird's nest, 
Closely embowered and trimly drest ; 
And thither young and old repair, 
This Sabbath-day, for praise and prayer. 
Fast the church-yard fills ; — anon 
Look again, and they all are gone ; 
The cluster round the porch, and the folk 
Who sate in the shade of the Prior's Oak ! 
And scarcely have they disappeared 
Ere the prelusive hymn is heard : — 
With one consent the people rejoice, 
Filling the church with a lofty voice ! 
They sing a service which they feel : 
For 'tis the sunrise now of zeal ; 
Of a pure faith the vernal prime — 
In great Eliza's golden time. 
A moment ends the fervent din, 
And all is hushed, without and within ; 
For though the priest, more tranquilly, 
Recites the holy liturgy, 
The only voice which you can hear 
Is the river murmuring near. 
— When soft ! — the dusky trees between, 
And down the path through the open green, 
Where is no living thing to be seen ; 
And through yon gateway, where is found, 
Beneath the arch with ivy bound, 
Free entrance to the church-yard ground- — 
Comes gliding in with lovely gleam, 
Comes gliding in serene and slow, 
Soft and silent as a dream, • 
A solitary Doe ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

White she is as lily of June, 
And beauteous as the silver moon 
When out of sight the clouds are driven 
And she is left alone in heaven ; 
Or like a ship some gentle day 
In sunshine sailing far away, 
A glittering ship, that hath the plain 
Of ocean for her own domain. 
Lie silent in your graves, ye dead ! 
Lie quiet in your church-yard bed ! 
Ye living, tend your holy cares ; 
Ye multitude, pursue your prayers ; 
And blame not me if my heart and sight 
Are occupied with one delight ! 
'Tis a work for sabbath hours 
If I with this bright Creature go : 
Whether she be of forest bowers, 
From the bowers of earth below ; 
Or a Spirit for one day given, 
A pledge of grace from purest heaven. 
What harmonious pensive changes 
Wait upon her as she ranges 
Round and through this Pile of state 
Overthrown and desolate ! 
Now a step or two her way 
Leads through space of open day, 
Where the enamoured sunny light 
Brightens her that was so bright ; 
Now doth a delicate shadow fall, 
Falls upon her like a breath, 
From some lofty arch or wall, 
As she passes underneath : 
Now some gloomy nook partakes 
Of the glory that she makes, — 
High-ribbed vault of stone, or cell, 
With perfect cunning framed as well 
Of stone, and ivy, and the spread 
Of the elder's bushy head ; 
Some jealous and forbidding cell, 
That doth the living stars repel, 
And where no flower hath leave to dwell. 
The presence of this wandering Doe 
Fills many a damp obscure recess 
With lustre of a saintly show ; 
And, reappearing, she no less 
Sheds on the flowers that round her blow 
A more than sunny liveliness. 
But say, among these holy places, 
Which thus assiduously she paces, 
Comes she with a votary's task, 
Rite to perform, or boon to ask ? 

Fair Pilgrim ! harbours she a sense 
Of sorrow, or of reverence \ 
Can she be grieved for quire or shrine, 
Crushed as if by wrath divine ? 
For what survives of house where God 
Was worshipped, or where Man abode ; 
For old magnificence undone ; 
Or for the gentler work begun 
By Nature, softening and concealing, 
And busy with a hand of healing? 
Mourns she for lordly chamber's hearth 
That to the sapling ash gives birth; 
For dormitory's length laid bare 
Where the wild rose blossoms fair ; 
Or altar, whence the cross was rent, 
Now rich with mossy ornament ? 
— She sees a warrior carved in stone, 
Among the thick weeds, stretched alone ; 
A warrior, with his shield of pride 
Cleaving humbly to his side, 
And hands in resignation prest, 
Palm to palm, on his tranquil breast; 
As little she regards the sight 
As a common creature might : 
If she be doomed to inward care, 
Or service, it must lie elsewhere. 
— But hers are eyes serenely bright, 
And on she moves — with pace how light ! 
Nor spares to stoop her head, and taste 
The dewy turf with flowers bestrown ; 
And thus she fares, until at last 
Beside the ridge of a grassy grave 
In quietness she lays her down ; 
Gentle as a weary wave 
Sinks, when the summer breeze hath died, 
Against an anchored vessel's side ; 
Even so, without distress, doth she 
Lie down hi peace, and lovingly. 
The day is placid in its going, 
To a lingering motion bound, 
Like the crystal stream now flowing 
With its softest summer sound : 
So the balmy minutes pass, 
While this radiant Creature lies 
Couched upon the dewy grass, 
Pensively with downcast eyes. 
— But now again the people raise 
With awful cheer a voice of praise ; 
It is the last, the parting song ; 
And from the temple forth they throng, 
And quickly spread themselves abroad, 
While each pursues his several road. 
But some — a variegated band 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

Of middle-aged, and old, and young, 
And little children by the hand 
Upon their leading mothers hung — 
With mute obeisance gladly paid 
Turn towards the spot, where, full in view, 
The white Doe, to her service true, 
Her sabbath couch has made. 
It was a solitary mound ; 
Which two spears' length of level ground 
Did from all other graves divide : 
As if in some respect of pride ; 
Or melancholy's sickly mood, 
Still shy of human neighbourhood ; 
Or guilt, that humbly would express 
A penitential loneliness. 
" Look, there she is, my Child ! draw near ; 
She fears not, wherefore should we fear  
She means no harm ;" — but still the Boy, 
To whom the words were softly said, 
Hung back, and smiled, and blushed for joy, 
A shame-faced blush of glowing red ! 
Again the Mother whispered low, 
" Now you have seen the famous Doe ; 
From Rylstone she hath found her way 
Over the hills this sabbath day ; 
Her work, whate'er it be, is done, 
And she will depart when we are gone ; 
Thus doth she keep, from year to year, 
Her sabbath morning, foul or fair." 
Bright was the Creature, as in dreams 
The Boy had seen her, yea, more bright ; 
But is she truly what she seems ? 
He asks with insecure delight, 
Asks of himself, and doubts, — and still 
The doubt returns against his will : 
Though he, and all the standers-by, 
Could tell a tragic history 
Of facts divulged, wherein appear 
Substantial motive, reason clear, 
Why thus the milk-white Doe is found 
Couchant beside that lonely mound; 
And why she duly ±oves to pace 
The circuit of this hallowed place. 
Nor to the Child's inquiring mind 
Is such perplexity confined : 
For, spite of sober Truth that sees 
A world of fixed remembrances 
Which to this mystery belong, 
If, undeceived, my skill can trace 
The characters of every face, 

There lack not strange delusion here, 
Conjecture vague, and idle fear, 
And superstitious fancies strong, 
Which do the gentle Creature wrong. 
That bearded, staff-supported Sire — 
Who in his boyhood often fed 
Full cheerily on convent-bread 
And heard old tales by the convent-fire, 
And to his grave will go with scars, 
Relics of long and distant wars — 
That Old Man, studious to expound 
The spectacle, is mounting high 
To days of dim antiquity ; 
When Lady Aaliza mourned 
Her Son, and felt in her despair 
The pang of unavailing prayer ; 
Her Son in Wharf's abysses drowned, 
The noble Boy of Egremound. 
From which affliction— when the grace 
Of God had in her heart found place — 
A pious structure, fair to see, 
Rose up, this stately Priory ! 
The Lady's work ; — but now laid low ; 
To the grief of her soul that doth come and go, 
In the beautiful form of this innocent Doe : 
Which, though seemingly doomed in its breast to 
sustain 
A softened remembrance of sorrow and pain, 
Is spotless, and holy, and gentle, and bright ; 
And glides o'er the earth like an angel of light. 
Pass, pass who will, yon chantry door ; 
And, through the chink in the fractured floor 
Look down, and see a griesly sight ; 
A vault where the bodies are buried upright ! 
There, face by face, and hand by hand, 
The Claphams and Mauleverers stand ; 
And, in his place, among son and sire, 
Is John de Clapham, that fierce Esquire, 
A valiant man, and a name of dread 
In the ruthless wars of the White and Red; 
Who dragged Earl Pembroke from Banbury church 
And smote off his head on the stones of the porch ! 
Look down among them, if you dare ; 
Oft does the White Doe loiter there, 
Prying into the dax'ksome rent ; 
Nor can it be with good intent : 
So thinks that Dame of haughty air, 
Who hath a Page her book to hold, 
And wears a frontlet edged with gold. 
Harsh thoughts with her high mood agree — 
Who counts among her ancestry 
Earl Pembroke, slain so impiously ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

That slender Youth, a scholar pale, 
From Oxford come to his native vale, 
He also hath his own conceit : 
It is, thinks he, the gracious Fairy, 
Who loved the Shepherd-lord to meet 
In his wanderings solitary : 
Wild notes she in his hearing sang, 
A song of Nature's hidden powers ; 
That whistled like the wind, and rang 
Among the rocks and holly bowers. 
'Twas said that She all shapes could wear ; 
And oftentimes before him stood, 
Amid the trees of some thick wood, 
In semblance of a lady fair ; 
And taught him signs, and showed him sights, 
In Craven's dens, on Cumbrian heights ; 
When under cloud of fear he lay, 
A shepherd clad in homely grey ; 
Nor left him at his later day. 
And hence, when he, with spear and shield, 
Rode full of years to Flodden-field, 
His eye could see the hidden spring, 
And how the current was to flow ; 
The fatal end of Scotland's King, 
And all that hopeless overthrow. 
But not in wars did he delight, 
This Clifford wished for worthier might ; 
Nor in broad pomp, or courtly state ; 
Him his own thoughts did elevate, — 
Most happy in the shy recess 
Of Barden's lowly quietness. 
And choice of studious friends had he 
Of Bolton's dear fraternity ; 
Who, standing on this old church tower, 
In many a calm propitious hour, 
Perused, with him, the starry sky ; 
Or, in their cells, with him did pry 
For other lore, — by keen desire 
Urged to close toil with chemic fire ; 
In quest belike of transmutations 
Rich as the mine's most bright creations. 
But they and their good works are fled, 
And all is now disquieted — 
And peace is none, for living or dead ! 
Ah, pensive Scholar, think not so, 
But look again at the radiant Doe ! 
What quiet watch she seems to keep, 
Alone, beside that grassy heap ! 
Why mention other thoughts unmeet 
For vision so composed and sweet? 
While stand the people in a ring, 
Gazing, doubting, questioning ; 
Yea, many overcome in spite 

Of recollections clear and bright ; 
Which yet do unto some impart 
An undisturbed repose of heart. 
And all the assembly own a law 
Of orderly respect and awe ; 
But see — they vanish one by one, 
And last, the Doe herself is gone. 
Harp ! we have been full long beguiled 
By vague thoughts, lured by fancies wild ; 
To which, with no reluctant strings, 
Thou hast attuned thy murmurings; 
And now before this Pile we stand 
In solitude, and utter peace : 
But, Harp ! thy murmurs may not cease — 
A Spirit, with his angelic wings, 
In soft and breeze-like visitmgs, 
Has touched thee — and a Spirit's hand : 
A voice is with us — a command 
To chant, in strains of heavenly glory, 
A tale of tears, a mortal story ! 

CANTO SECOND. 
The Harp in lowliness obeyed ; 
And first we sang of the green-wood shade 
And a solitary Maid ; 
Beginning, where the song must end, 
With her, and with her sylvan Friend ; 
The Friend who stood before her sight, 
Her only unextinguished light ; 
Her last companion in a dearth 
Of love, upon a hopeless earth. 
For She it was — this Maid, who wrought 
Meekly, with foi'eboding thought, 
In vermeil colours and in gold 
An unblest work ; which, standing by, 
Her Father did with joy behold, — 
Exulting in its imagery ; 
A Banner, fashioned to fulfil 
Too perfectly his headstrong will : 
For on this Banner had her hand 
Embroidered (such her Sire's command) 
The sacred Cross ; and figured there 
The five dear wounds our Lord did bear ; 
Full soon to be uplifted high, 
And float in rueful company ! 
It was the time when England's Queen 
Twelve years had reigned, a Sovereign dread ; 
Nor yet the restless crown had been 
Disturbed upon her virgin head ; 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

ut now the inly-working North 
if as ripe to send its thousands forth, 
| potent vassalage, to fight 
II Percy's and in Neville's right, 
iwo Earls fast leagued in discontent, 
faio gave their wishes open vent ; 
Ind boldly urged a general plea, 
he rites of ancient piety 
jo be triumphantly restored, 
;y the stern justice of the sword ! 
ind that same Banner, on whose breast 
he blameless Lady had exprest 
Memorials chosen to give life 
nd sunshine to a dangerous strife ; 
hat Banner, waiting for the Call, 
;ood quietly in Bylstone-hall. 
: It came ; and Francis Norton said, 
' Father ! rise not in this fray — 
!he hairs are white upon your head ; 
ear Father, hear me when I say 
is for you too late a day ! 
ethink you of your own good name : 
just and gracious Queen have we, 
pure religion, and the claim 
if peace on our humanity. — 
[is meet that I endure your scorn ; 
am your sou, your eldest born ; 
ut not for lordship or for land, 
|y Father, do I clasp your knees ; 
he Banner touch not, stay your hand, 
pis multitude of men disband, 
jnd live at home in blameless ease ; 
'or these my brethren's sake, for me ; 
.nd, most of all, for Emily ! " 
Tumultuous noises filled the hall ; 
nd scarcely could the Father hear 
hat name — pronounced with a dying fall — 
he name of his only Daughter dear, 
s on the banner which stood near 
e glanced a look of holy pride, 
 nd his moist eyes were glorified ; 
'hen did he seize the staff, and say : 
[Thou, Richard, bear'st thy father's name, 
 eep thou this ensign till the day 
j/hen I of thee require the same : 
hy place be on my better hand ; — 
nd seven as true as thou, I see, 
Pill cleave to this good cause and me." 
Ie spake, and eight brave sons straightway 
ul followed him, a gallant band ! 
; Thus, with his sons, when forth he came 
j'he sight was hailed with loud acclaim 

And din of arms and minstrelsy, 
From all his warlike tenantry, 
All horsed and harnessed with him to ride, — 
A voice to which the hills replied ! 
But Francis, in the vacant hall, 
Stood silent under dreary weight, — 
A phantasm, in which roof and wall 
Shook, tottered, swam before his sight ; 
A phantasm like a dream of night ! 
Thus overwhelmed, and desolate, 
He found his way to a postern-gate ; 
And, when he waked, his languid eye 
Was on the calm and silent sky ; 
With air abotit him breathing sweet, 
And earth's green grass beneath his feet ; 
Nor did he fail ere long to hear 
A sound of military cheer, 
Faint — but it reached that sheltered spot ; 
He heard, and it disturbed him not. 
There stood he, leaning on a lance 
Which he had grasped unknowingly, 
Had blindly grasped in that strong trance, 
That dimness of heart-agony ; 
There stood he, cleansed from the despair 
And sorrow of his fruitless prayer. 
The past he calmly hath reviewed : 
But where will be the fortitude 
Of this brave man, when he shall see 
That Form beneath the spreading tree, 
And know that it is Emily ? 
He saw her where in open view 
She sate beneath the spreading yew — 
Her head upon her lap, concealing 
In solitude her bitter feeling : 
" Might ever son command a sire, 
The act were justified to-day." 
This to himself — and to the Maid, 
Whom now he had approached, he said — 
" Gone are they, — they have their desire ; 
And I with thee one hour will stay, 
To give thee comfort if I may." 
She heard, but looked not up, nor spake ; 
And sorrow moved him to partake 
Her silence ; then his thoughts turned romid, 
And fervent words a passage found. 
" Gone are they, bravely, though misled ; 
With a dear Father at their head ! 
The Sons obey a natural lord ; 
The Father had given solemn word 

-i 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

To noble Percy ; and a force 

Therewith he threw away the lance, 

Still stronger, bends him to his course. 

Which he had grasped in that strong trance • 

This said, our tears to-day may fall 

Spurned it, like something that would stand 

As at an innocent funeral. 

Between him and the pure intent 

In deep and awful channel runs 

Of love on which his soul was bent. 

This sympathy of Sire and Sons ; 


Untried our Brothers have been loved 

" For thee, for thee, is left the sense 

With heart by simple nature moved ; 

Of trial past without offence 

And now their faithfulness is proved : 

To God or man ; such innocence, 

For faithful we must call them, bearing 

Such consolation, and the excess 

That soul of conscientious daring. 

Of an unmerited distress ; 

— There were they all in circle — there 

In that thy very strength must lie. 

Stood Richard, Ambrose, Christopher, 

— Sister, I could prophesy ! 

John with a sword that will not fail, 

The time is come that rings the knell 

And Marmaduke in fearless mail, 

Of all we loved, and loved so well : 

And those bright Twins were side by side ; 

Hope nothing, if I thus may speak 

And there, by fresh hopes beautified, 

To thee, a woman, and thence weak : 

Stood He, whose arm yet lacks the power 

Hope nothing, I repeat ; for we 

Of man, our youngest, fairest flower ! 
I, by the right of eldest born, 
And in a second father's place, 
Presumed to grapple with their scorn, 
And meet their pity face to face ; 
Yea, trusting in God's holy aid, 
I to my Father knelt and prayed ; 
And one, the pensive Marmaduke, 
Methought, was yielding inwardly, 
And would have laid his purpose by, 
But for a glance of his Father's eye, 
Which I myself could scarcely brook. 
Then be we, each and all, forgiven ! 
Thou, chiefly thou, my Sister dear, 
Whose pangs are registered in heaven — 
The stifled sigh, the hidden tear, 
And smiles, that dared to take their place, 
Meek filial smiles, upon thy face, 
As that unhallowed Banner grew 
Beneath a loving old Man's view. 
Thy part is done — thy painful part ; 
Be thou then satisfied in heart ! 
A further, though far easier, task 
Than thine hath been, my duties ask ; 
With theirs my efforts cannot blend, 
I cannot for such cause contend ; 
Their aims I utterly forswear ; 
But I in body will be there. 
Unarmed and naked will I go, 
Be at their side, come weal or woe : 
On kind occasions I may wait, 
See, hear, obstruct, or mitigate. 
Bare breast I take and an empty hand."— 

 See the Old Ballad,—" The Rising of the North.' 

Are doomed to perish utterly : 
'Tis meet that thou with me divide 
The thought while I am by thy side, 
Acknowledging a grace in this, 
A comfort in the dark abyss. 
But look not for me when I am gone, 
And be no farther wrought upon : 
Farewell all wishes, all debate, 
All prayers for this cause, or for that ! 
Weep, if that aid thee ; but depend 
Upon no help of outward friend ; 
Espouse thy doom at once, and cleave 
To fortitude without reprieve. 
For we must fall, both we and ours — 
This Mansion and these pleasant bowers, 
Walks, pools, and arbours, homestead, hall— 
Our fate is theirs, will reach them all ; 
The young horse must forsake his manger. 
And learn to glory in a Stranger ; 
The hawk forget his perch ; the hound 
Be parted from his ancient ground : 
The blast will sweep us all away — 
One desolation, one decay ! 
And even this Creature ! " which words saying, 
He pointed to a lovely Doe, 
A few steps distant, feeding, straying ; 
Fair creature, and more white than snow ! 
" Even she will to her peaceful woods 
Return, and to her murmuring floods, 
And be in heart and soul the same 
She was before she hither came ; 
Ere she had learned to love us all, 
Herself beloved in Rylstone-hall. 
— But thou, my Sister, doomed to be 
The last leaf on a blasted tree ; 
If not in vain we breathed the breath 


THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

Together of a purer faith ; 
■ If hand in hand we have been led, 
And thou, ( happy thought this day !) 
Not seldom foremost in the way ; 
 If on one thought our minds have fed, 
And we have in one meaning read ; 
If, when at home our private weal 
Hath suffered from the shock of zeal, 
Together we have learned to prize 
Forbearance and self-sacrifice ; 
If we like combatants have fared, 
And for this issue been prepared ; 
If thou art beautiful, and youth 
And thought endue thee with all truth- 
Be strong ; — be worthy of the grace 
Of God, and fill thy destined place : 
A Soul, by force of sorrows high, 
■Uplifted to the purest sky 
Of undisturbed humanity !" 
, He ended, — or she heard no more ; 
He led her from the yew-tree shade, 
JAnd at the mansion's silent door, 
He kissed the consecrated Maid ; 
And down the valley then pursued, 
Alone, the armed Multitude. 

CANTO THIRD. 
'Now joy for you who from the towers 
Of Brancepeth look in doubt and fear, 
Telling melancholy hours ! 
'Proclaim it, let your Masters hear 
That Norton with his band is near ! 
The watchmen from their station high 
Pronounced the word, — and the Earls descry, 
Well-pleased, the armed Company 
Marching down the banks of Were. 
] Said fearless Norton to the pair 
Gone forth to greet him on the plain — 
' This meeting, noble Lords ! looks fair, 
I bring with me a goodly train ; 
Their hearts are with you : hill and dale 
Have helped us : Ure we crossed, and Swale, 
And horse and harness followed — see 
The best part of their Yeomanry ! 
—Stand forth, my Sons ! — these eight are mine, 
Whom to this service I commend ; 
[Which way soe'er our fate incline, 
iThese will be faithful to the end ; 
They are my all " — voice failed him here — 
" My all save one, a Daughter dear ! 

Whom I have left, Love's mildest birth, 
The meekest Child on this blessed earth. 
I had — but these are by my side, 
These Eight, and this is a day of pride ! 
The time is ripe. With festive din 
Lo ! how the people are flocking in, — 
Like hungry fowl to the feeder's hand 
When snow lies heavy upon the land." 
He spake bare truth ; for far and near- 
From every side came noisy swarms 
Of Peasants in their homely gear ; 
And, mixed with these, to Brancepeth came 
Grave Gentry of estate and name, 
And Captains known for worth in arms ; 
And prayed the Earls in self-defence 
To rise, and prove their innocence. — 
" Rise, noble Earls, put forth your might 
For holy Church, and the People's right !" 
The Norton fixed, at this demand, 
His eye upon Northumberland, 
And said ; " The Minds of Men will own 
No loyal rest while England's Crown 
Remains without an Heir, the bait 
Of strife and factions desperate ; 
Who, paying deadly hate in kind 
Through all things else, in this can find 
A mutual hope, a common mind ; 
And plot, and pant to overwhelm 
All ancient honour in the realm. 
— Brave Earls ! to whose heroic veins 
Our noblest blood is given in trust, 
To you a suffering State complains, 
And ye must raise her from the dust. 
With wishes of still bolder scope 
On you we look, with dearest hope ; 
Even for our Altars — for the prize 
In Heaven, of life that never dies ; 
For the old and holy Church we mourn, 
And must in joy to her return. 
Behold ! " — and from his Son whose stand 
Was on his right, from that guardian hand 
He took the Banner, and unfurled 
The precious folds — " behold," said he, 
" The ransom of a sinful world ; 
Let this your preservation be ; 
The wounds of hands and feet and side, 
And the sacred Cross on which Jesus died 
— This bring I from an ancient hearth, 
These Records wrought in pledge of love 
By hands of no ignoble birth, 
A Maid o'er whom the blessed Dove 
Vouchsafed in gentleness to brood 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

While she the holy work pursued." 
" Uplift the Standard ! " was the cry 
From all the listeners that stood round, 
" Plant it, — by this we live or die." 
The Norton ceased not for that sound, 
But said ; " The prayer which ye have heard, 
Much injured Earls ! by these preferred, 
Is offered to the Saints, the sigh 
Of tens of thousands, secretly." 
" Uplift it ! " cried once more the Band, 
And then a thoughtful pause ensued : 
" Uplift it ! " said Northumberland — 
Whereat, from all the multitude 
Who saw the Banner reared on high 
In all its dread emblazonry, 
A voice of uttermost joy brake out : 
The transport was rolled down the river of Were, 
And Durham, the time-honoured Durham, did 
hear, 
And the towers of Saint Cuthbert were stirred 
by the shout ! 
Now was the North in arms : — they shine 
In warlike trim from Tweed to Tyne, 
At Percy's voice : and Neville sees 
His Followers gathering in from Tees, 
From Were, and all the little rills 
Concealed among the forked hills — 
Seven hundred Knights, Retainers all 
Of Neville, at their Master's call 
Had sate together in Raby Hall ! 
Such strength that Earldom held of yore ; 
Nor wanted at this time rich store 
Of well-appointed chivalry. 
— Not loth the sleepy lance to wield, 
And greet the old paternal shield, 
They heard the summons ; — and, furthermore, 
Horsemen and Foot of each degree, 
Unbound by pledge of fealty, 
Appeared, with free and open hate 
Of novelties in Church and State ; 
Knight, burgher, yeoman, and esquire ; 
And Romish priest, in priest's attire. 
And thus, in arms, a zealous Band 
Proceeding under joint command, 
To Durham first their course they bear ; 
And in Saint Cuthbert's ancient seat 
Sang mass, — and tore the book of prayer, — 
And trod the bible beneath their feet. 
Thence marching southward smooth and free 
{ They mustered their host at Wetherby, 
Full sixteen thousand fair to see ; ' 

 From the old ballad. 

The Choicest Warriors of the North ! 
But none for beauty and for worth 
Like those eight Sons — who, in a ring, 
(Ripe men, or blooming in life's spring) 
Each with a lance, erect and tall, 
A falchion, and a buckler small, 
Stood by their Sire, on Clifford-moor, 
To guard the Standard which he bore. 
On foot they girt their Father round ; 
And so will keep the appointed ground 
Where'er their march : no steed will he 
Henceforth bestride ; — triumphantly, 
He stands upon the grassy sod, 
Trusting himself to the earth, and God. 
Rare sight to embolden and inspire ! 
Proud was the field of Sons and Sire ; 
Of him the most ; and, sooth to say, 
No shape of man in all the array 
So graced the sunshine of that day. 
The monumental pomp of age 
Was with this goodly Personage ; 
A stature undepressed in size, 
Unbent, which rather seemed to rise, 
In open victory o'er the weight 
Of seventy years, to loftier height ; 
Magnific limbs of withered state ; 
A face to fear and venerate ; 
Eyes dark and strong ; and on his head 
Bright locks of silver hair, thick spread, 
Which a brown morion half-concealed, 
Light as a hunter's of the field ; 
And thus, with girdle round his waist, 
Whereon the Banner-staff might rest 
At need, he stood, advancing high 
The ghttering, floating Pageantry. 
Who sees him ? — thousands see, aud One 
With unparticipated gaze ; 
Who, 'mong those thousands, friend hath none. 
And treads in solitary ways. 
He, following 'wheresoe'er he might, 
Hath watched the Banner from afar, 
As shepherds watch a lonely star, 
Or mariners the distant light 
That guides them through a stormy night. 
And now, upon a chosen plot 
Of rising ground, yon heathy spot ! 
He takes alone his far-off stand, 
With breast unmailed, unweaponed hand. 
Bold is his aspect ; but his eye 
Is pregnant with anxiety, 
While, like a tutelary Power, 
He there stands fixed from hour to hour : 
Yet sometimes in more humble guise, 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

pon the turf-clad height he lies 
retched, herdsman-like, as if to bask 
sunshine were his only task, 
• by his mantle's help to find 
shelter from the nipping wind : 
id thus, with short oblivion blest, 
is weary spirits gather rest. 
rain he lifts his eyes ; and lo ! 
je pageant glancing to and fro ; 
id hope is wakened by the sight, 
 thence may learn, ere fall of night, 
Inch way the tide is doomed to flow. 
To London were the Chieftains bent ; 
lit what avails the bold intent ? 
j Royal army is gone forth 
I quell the Rising of the North ; 
ley march with Dudley at their head, 
id, in seven days' space, will to York be led ! — 
•jn such a mighty Host be raised 
'us suddenly, and brought so near ? 
'je Earls upon each other gazed, 
Id Neville's cheek grew pale with fear ; 
]jr, with a high and valiant name, 
I bore a heart of timid frame ; 
id bold if both had been, yet they 
''gainst so many may not stay .' 
"ck therefore will they hie to seize 
[strong Hold on the banks of Tees ; 
iere wait a favourable hour, 
jitil Lord Dacre with his power 
oru Naworth come ; and Howard's aid 
| with them openly displayed. 

ile through the Host, from man to man, 
I rumour of this purpose ran, 
le Standard trusting to the care 
; him who heretofore did bear 
lat charge, impatient Norton sought 
lie Chieftains to unfold his thought, 
jid thus abruptly spake ; — " We yield 
[nd can it be ?) an unfought field ! — 
')w oft has strength, the strength of neaven, 
> few triumphantly been given ! 
|I do our very children boast 
■ mitred Thurston— what a Host 
p conquered ! — Saw we not the Plain 
bid flying shall behold again) 
J here faith was proved? — while to battle moved 
ie Standard, on the Sacred Wain 
jiat bore it, compassed round by a bold 
maternity of Barons old ; 

 Fron the old Ballad. 

And with those grey-haired champions stood, 
Under the saintly ensigns three, 
The infant Heir of Mowbray's blood — 
All confident of victory ! — 
Shall Percy blush, then, for his name? 
Must Westmoreland be asked with shame 
Whose were the numbers, where the loss, 
In that other day of Neville's Cross ? 
When the Prior of Durham with holy hand 
Raised, as the Vision gave command, 
Saint Cuthbert's Relic — far and near 
Kenned on the point of a lofty spear ; 
While the Monks prayed in Maiden's Bower 
To God descending in his power. 
Less would not at our need be due 
To us, who war against the Untrue ; — 
The delegates of Heaven we rise, 
Convoked the impious to chastise : 
We, we, the sanctities of old 
Would re-establish and uphold : 
Be warned " — His zeal the Chiefs confounded, 
But word was given, and the trumpet sounded : 
Back through the melancholy Host 
Went Norton, and resumed his post. 
Alas ! thought he, and have I borne 
This Banner raised with joyful pride, 
This hope of all posterity, 
By those dread symbols sanctified ; 
Thus to become at once the scorn 
Of babbling winds as they go by, 
A spot of shame to the sun's bright eye, 
To the light clouds a mockery ! 
— " Even these poor eight of mine would stem — ' 
Half to himself, and half to them 
He spake — " would stem, or quell, a force 
Ten times their number, man and horse; 
This by their own unaided might, 
Without their father in their sight, 
Without the Cause for which they fight ; 
A Cause, which on a needful day 
Would breed us thousands brave as they." 
— So speaking, he his reverend head 
Raised towards that Imagery once more : 
But the familiar prospect shed 
Despondency unfelt before : 
A shock of intimations vain, 
Dismay, and superstitious pain, 
Fell on him, with the sudden thought 
Of her by whom the work was wrought : — 
Oh wherefore was her countenance bright 
With love divine and gentle light ? 
She would not, could not, disobey, 
But her Faith leaned another way. 
Ill tears she wept ; I saw them fall, 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

I overheard her as she spake 
Sad words to that mute Animal, 
The White Doe, in the hawthorn brake ; 
She steeped, hut not for Jesu's sake, 
This Cross in tears : by her, and One 
Unworthier far we are undone — 
Her recreant Brother — he prevailed 
Over that tender Spirit — assailed 
Too oft alas ! by her whose head 
In the cold grave hath long been laid : 
She first, in reason's dawn beguiled 
Her docile, unsuspecting Child : 
Far back — far back my mind must go 
To reach the well-spring of this woe ! 
While thus he brooded, music sweet 
Of border tunes was played to cheer 
The footsteps of a quick retreat ; 
But Norton lingered in the rear, 
Stung with sharp thoughts ; and ere the last 
From his distracted brain was cast, 
Before his Father, Francis stood, 
And spake in firm and earnest mood. 
" Though here I bend a suppliant knee 
In reverence, and unarmed, I bear 
In your indignant thoughts my share ; 
Am grieved this backward march to see 
So careless and disorderly. 
I scorn your Chiefs — men who would lead. 
And yet want courage at their need : 
Then look at them with open eyes ! 
Deserve they further sacrifice ? — 
If — when they shrink, nor dare oppose 
In open field their gathering foes, 
(And fast, from this decisive day, 
Yon multitude must melt away ;) 
If now I ask a grace not claimed 
While ground was left for hope ; unblamed 
Be an endeavour that can do 
No injury to them or you. 
My Father ! I would help to find 
A place of shelter, till the rage 
Of cruel men do like the wind 
Exhaust itself and sink to rest ; 
Be Brother now to Brother joined ! 
Admit me in the equipage 
Of your misfortunes, that at least, 
Whatever fate remain behind, 
I may bear witness in my breast 
To your nobility of mind !" 
" Thou Enemy, my bane and blight ! 
Oh ! bold to fight the Coward's fight 

Against all good " — but why declare, 
At length, the issue of a prayer 
Which love had prompted, yielding scope 
Too free to one bright moment's hope ? 
Suffice it that the Son, who strove 
With fruitless effort to allay 
That passion, prudently gave way ; 
Nor did he turn aside to prove 
His Brothers' wisdom or their love — 
But calmly from the spot withdrew ; 
His best endeavours to renew, 
Should e'er a kindlier time ensue. 

- 

CANTO FOURTH. 
'Tis night : in silence looking down, 
The Moon, from cloudless ether, sees 
A Camp, and a beleaguered Town, 
And Castle like a stately crown 
On the steep rocks of winding Tees ;— 
And southward far, with moor between, 
Hill-top, and flood, and forest greeD, 
The bright Moon sees that valley small 
Where Rylstone's old sequestered Hall 
A venerable image yields 
Of quiet to the neighbouring fields ; 
While from one pillared chimney breathes 
The smoke, and mounts in silver wreaths. 
— The courts are hushed ; — for timely sleep 
The grey -hounds to their kennel creep ; 
The peacock in the broad ash tree 
Aloft is roosted for the night, 
He who in proud prosperity 
Of colours manifold and bright 
Walked round, affronting the daylight ; 
And higher still, above the bower 
Where he is perched, from yon lone Tow-<sr 
The hall-clock in the clear moonshine 
With glittering finger points at nine. 
Ah ! who could think that sadness here 
Hath any sway ? or pain, or fear ? 
A soft and lulling sound is heard 
Of streams inaudible by day ; 
The garden pool's dark surface, stirred 
By the night insects in their play, 
Breaks into dimples small and bright ; 
A thousand, thousand rings of light 
That shape themselves and disappear 
Almost as soon as seen : — and lo ! 
Not distant far, the milk-white Doe — 
The same who quietly was feeding 
On the green herb, and nothing heeding, 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

? 

When Francis, uttering to the Maid 

When here, in this remote alcove, 

His last words in the yew-tree shade, 

(While from the pendent woodbine came 

Involved whate'er by love was brought 

Like odours, sweet as if the same) 

Out of his heart, or crossed his thought, 

A fondly-anxious Mother strove 

Or chance presented to his eye, 

To teach her salutary fears 

In one sad sweep of destiny — 

And mysteries above her years. 

The same fab Creature, who hath found 

Yes, she is soothed : an Image faint, 

Her way into forbidden ground ; 

And yet not faint — a presence bright 

Where now — within this spacious plot 

Returns to her — that blessed Saint 

For pleasure made, a goodly spot, 

Who with mild looks and language mild 

With lawns and beds of flowers, and shades 

Instructed here her darling Child, 

Of trellis- work in long arcades, 

While yet a prattler on the knee, 

And cirque and crescent framed by wall 

To worship in simplicity 

Of close-clipt foliage green and tall, 

The invisible God, and take for guide 

Converging walks, and fountains gay, 

The faith reformed and purified. 

And terraces in trim array — 


Beneath yon cypress spiring high, 

'Tis flown — the Vision, and the sense 

With pine and cedar spreading wide 

Of that beguiling  influence ; 

Their darksome boughs on either side, 

" But oh ! thou Angel from above, 

[n open moonlight doth she he ; 

Mute Spirit of maternal love, 

Happy as others of her kind, 

That stood' st before my eyes, more clear 

That, far from human neighbourhood, 

Than ghosts are fabled to appear 

Range unrestricted as the wind, 

Sent upon embassies of fear ; 

Through park, or chase, or savage wood. 

As thou thy presence hast to me 


Vouchsafed, in radiant ministry 

But see the consecrated Maid 

Descend on Francis ; nor forbear 

[Emerging from a cedar shade 

To greet him with a voice, and say ; — 

•To open moonshine, where the Doe 

'If hope be a rejected stay, 

(Seneath the cypress-spire is laid ; 

' Do thou, my christian Son, beware 

Like a patclj^jf April snow — 

' Of that most lamentable snare, 

Jpon a bed of herbage green, 

' The self-reliance of despair !' " 

fingering in a woody glade 


Or behind a rocky screen — 

Then from within the embowered retreat 

Lonely relic ! which, if seen 
(By the shepherd, is passed by 
jWith an inattentive eye. 
jNor more regard doth She bestow 
Jpon the uncomplaining Doe 
[Now couched at ease, though oft this day 
Not unperplexed nor free from pain, 
ISVhen she had tried, and tried in vain, 
Approaching in her gentle way, 
[To win some look of love, or gain 
Encouragement to sport or play ; 
Attempts which still the heart-sick Maid 
Rejected, or with slight repaid. 
Yet Emily is soothed ; — the breeze 
!ame fraught with kindly sympathies. 
jAs she approached yon rustic Shed 
jflung with late-flowering woodbine, spread 
'Along the walls and overhead, 
(The fragrance of the breathing flowers 
Revived a memory of those hours 

Where she had found a grateful seat 
Perturbed she issues. She will go ! 
Herself will follow to the war, 
And clasp her Father's knees ; — ah, no ! 
She meets the insuperable bar, 
The injunction by her Brother laid ; 
His parting charge — but ill obeyed — 
That interdicted all debate, 
All prayer for this cause or for that ; 
All efforts that would turn aside 
The headstrong current of their fate : 
Her duty is to stand and wait; 
In resignation to abide 
The shock, and finally secure 
O'er pain and grief a triumph pure. 
— She feels it, and her pangs are checked. 
But now, as silently she paced 
The turf, and thought by thought was chased, 
Came One who, with sedate respect, 
Approached, and, greeting her, thus spake ; 
" An old man's privilege I take : 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Dark is the time — a woeful day ! 
Dear daughter of affliction, say- 
How can I serve you ? point the way." 
" Rights have you, and may well be hold : 
You with my Father have grown old 
In friendship — strive— for his sake go — 
Turn from us all the coming woe : 
This would I beg ; but on my mind 
A passive stillness is enjoined. 
On you, if room for mortal aid 
Be left, is no restriction laid ; 
You not forbidden to recline 
With hope upon the Will divine." 
"Hope," said the old Man, "must abide 
With all of us, whate'er betide. 
In Craven's Wilds is many a den, 
To shelter persecuted men : 
Far under ground is many a cave, 
Where they might lie as in the grave, 
Until this storm hath ceased to rave : 
Or let them cross the River Tweed, 
And be at once from peril freed !" 
"Ah tempt me not ! " she faintly sighed ; 
"I will not counsel nor exhort, 
With my condition satisfied ; 
But you, at least, may make report 
Of what befals ; — be this your task — ■ 
This may be done ; — 'tis all I ask ! " 
She spake — and from the Lady's sight 
The Sire, unconscious of his age, 
Departed promptly as a Page 
Bound on some errand of delight. 
— The noble Francis — wise as brave, 
Thought he, may want not skill to save. 
With hopes in tenderness concealed, 
Unarmed he followed to the field ; 
Him will I seek : the insurgent Powers 
Are now besieging Barnard's Towers, — 
" Grant that the Moon which shines this night 
May guide them in a prudent flight ! " 
But quick the turns of chance and change, 
And knowledge has a narrow range ; 
Whence idle fears, and needless pain, 
And wishes blind, and efforts vain. — 
The Moon may shine, but cannot be 
Their guide in flight — already she 
Hath witnessed their captivity. 
She saw the desperate assault 
Upon that hostile castle made ; — 
But dark and dismal is the vault 

Where Norton and his sons are laid ! 
Disastrous issue ! — he had said 
" This night yon faithless Towers must yield, 
Or we for ever quit the field. 
— Neville is utterly dismayed, 
For promise fails of Howard's aid ; 
And Dacre to our call replies 
That he is unprepared to rise. 
My heart is sick ; — this weary pause 
Must needs be fatal to our cause. 
The breach is open — on the wall, 
This night, the Banner shall be planted!" 
■ — 'Twas done : his Sons were with him — all ; 
They belt him round with hearts undaunted 
And others follow ; — Sire and Son 
Leap down into the couit ; — " 'Tis won " — 
They shout aloud — but Heaven decreed 
That with their joyful shout should close 
The triumph of a desperate deed 
Which struck with terror friends and foes ! 
The friend shrinks back — the foe recoils 
From Norton and his filial band ; 
But they, now caught within the toils, 
Against a thousand cannot stand ; — 
The foe from numbers courage drew, 
And overpowered that gallant few. 
" A rescue for the Standard !" cried 
The Father from within the walls ; 
But, see, the sacred Standard falls ! — 
Confusion through the Camp spmad wide : 
Some fled ; and some their fears detained : 
But ere the Moon had sunk to rest 
In her pale chambers of the west, 
Of that rash levy nought remained. 

CANTO FIFTH. 
High on a point of rugged ground 
Among the wastes of Rylstone Fell 
Above the loftiest ridge or mound 
Where foresters or shepherds dwell, 
An edifice of warlike frame 
Stands single — Norton Tower its name — 
It fronts all quarters, and looks round 
O'er path and road, and plain and dell, 
Dark moor, and gleam of pool and stream 
Upon a prospect without bound. 
The summit of this bold ascent — 
Though bleak and bare, and seldom free 
As Pendle-hill or Pennygent 
From wind, or frost, or vapours wet — 
Had often heard the sound of glee 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

i When there the youthful Nortons met, 
:To practise games and archery : 
How proud and happy they ! the crowd 
Of Lookers-on how pleased and proud ! 
And from the scorching noon-tide sun, 
From showers, or when the prize was won, 
They to the Tower withdrew, and there 
Would mirth ran round, with generous fare ; 
:And the stern old Lord of Rylstone-hall, 
;Was happiest, proudest, of them all ! 
But now, his Child, with anguish pale, 
Upon the height walks to and fro ; 
i'Tis well that she hath heard the tale, 
Received the bitterness of woe : 
:For she had hoped, had hoped and feared, 
Such rights did feeble nature claim ; 
'And oft her steps had hither steered, 
Though not unconscious of self-blame ; 
For she her brother's charge revered, 
His farewell words ; and by the same, 
fea by her brother's very name, 
Had, in her solitude, been cheered. 
i Beside the lonely watch-tower stood 
That grey-haired Man of gentle blood, 
Who with her Father had grown old 
;fn friendship ; rival hunters they, 
And fellow warriors in their day ; 
To Rylstone he the tidings brought ; 
Then on this height the Maid had sought, 
A.nd, gently as he could, had told 
The end of that dire Tragedy, 
Which ifc had been his lot to see. 
I To him the Lady turned ; " You said 
That Francis lives, lie is not dead ? " 
"Your noble brother hath been spared ; 
To take his life they have not dared ; 
On him and on his high endeavour 
The light of praise shall shine for ever ! 
;^or did he (such Heaven's will) in vain 
His solitary course maintain ; 
N'ot vainly struggled in the might 
f duty, seeing with clear sight ; 
Te was their comfort to the last, 
Their joy till every pang was past. 
I witnessed when to York they came — 
What, Lady, if their feet were tied ; 
They might deserve a good Man's blame ; 
But marks of infamy and shame — 
These were their triumph, these their pride ; 

Nor wanted 'mid the pressing crowd 
Deep feeling, that found utterance loud, 
' Lo, Francis comes,' there were who cried, 
' A Prisoner once, but now set free ! 
'Tis well, for he the worst defied 
Through force of natural piety ; 
He rose not in this quarrel, he, 
For concord's sake and England's good, 
Suit to his Brothers often made 
With tears, and of his lather prayed — 
And when he had in vain withstood 
Their purpose — then did he divide, 
He parted from them ; but at their side 
Now walks in unanimity. 
Then peace to cruelty and scorn, 
While to the prison they are borne, 
Peace, peace to all indignity ! ' 
And so in Prison were they laid — 
Oh hear me, hear me, gentle Maid, 
For I am come with power to bless, 
By scattering gleams, through your distress, 
Of a redeeming happiness. 
Me did a reverent pity move 
And privilege of ancient love ; 
And, in your service, making bold, 
Entrance I gained to that strong-hold. 
Your Father gave me cordial greeting \ 
But to his purposes, that burned 
Within him, instantly returned i 
He was commanding and entreating, 
And said — ' We need not stop, my Son ! 
Thoughts press, and time is hurrying on ' — 
And so to Francis he renewed 
His words, more calmly thus pursued. 
' Might this our enterprise have sped, 
Change wide and deep the Land had seen, 
A renovation from the dead, 
A spring-tide of immortal green : 
The darksome altars would have blazed 
Like stars when clouds are rolled away ; 
Salvation to all eyes that gazed, 
Once more the Rood had been upraised 
To spread its arms, and stand for aye. 
Then, then — had I survived to see 
New life in Bolton Priory ; 
The voice restored, the eye of Truth 
Re-opened that inspired my youth ; 
To see her in her pomp arrayed — 
This Banner (for such vow I made) 
Should on the consecrated breast 
Of that same Temple have found rest : 

 POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

I would myself have hung it high, 

So cruel Sussex, unrestrained 

Fit offering of glad victory ! 

By human feeling, had ordained. 


The unhappy Banner Francis saw, 

A shadow of such thought remains 

And, with a look of calm command 

To cheer this sad and pensive time ; 

Inspiring universal awe, 

A solemn fancy yet sustains 

He took it from the soldier's hand ; 

One feeble Being — bids me climb 

And all the people that stood round 

Even to the last — one effort more 

Confirmed the deed in peace profound. 

To attest my Faith, if not restore. 

— High transport did the Father shed 


Upon his Son — and they were led, 

Hear then,' said he, ' while I impart, 

Led on, and yielded up their breath ; 

My Son, the last wish of my heart. • 

Together died, a happy death ! — 

The Banner strive thou to regain ; 

But Francis, soon as he had braved 

And, if the endeavour prove not vain, 

That insult, and the Banner saved, 

Bear it — to whom if not to thee 

Athwart the unresisting tide 

Shall I this lonely thought consign ? — 

Of the spectators occupied 

Bear it to Bolton Priory, 

In admiration or dismay, 

And lay it on Saint Mary's shrine ; 

Bore instantly his Charge away." 

To wither in the sun and breeze 


'Mid those decaying sanctities. 

These things, which thus had in the sight 

There let at least the gift be laid, 

And hearing passed of Him who stood 

The testimony there displayed ; 

With Emily, on the Watch-tower height, 

Bold proof that with no selfish aim, 

In Rylstone's woeful neighbourhood, 

But for lost Faith and Christ's dear name, 

He told ; and oftentimes with voice 

I helmeted a brow though white, 

Of power to comfort or rejoice; 

And took a place hi all men's sight ; 

For deepest sorrows that aspire, 

Yea offered up this noble Brood, 

Go high, no transport ever higher. 

This fair unrivalled Brotherhood, 

" Yes — God is rich in mercy," said 

And turned away from thee, my Son ! 

The old Man to the silent Maid, 

And left — but be the rest unsaid, 

"Yet, Lady ! shines, through this black night, 

The name untouched, the tear unshed ; — ■ 

One star of aspect heavenly bright ; 

My wish is known, and I have done : 

Your Brother lives — he lives — is come 

Now promise, grant this one request, 

Perhaps already to his home ; 

This dying prayer, and be thou blest ! ' 

Then let us leave this dreary place." 


She yielded, and with gentle pace, 

Then Francis answered — ' Trust thy Son, 

Though without one uplifted look, 

For, with God's will, it shall be done ! ' — 

To Rylstone-hall her way she took. 

The pledge obtained, the solemn word 
Thus scarcely given, a noise was heard, 



And Officers appeared in state 

CANTO SIXTH. 

To lead the prisoners to their fate. 

Why comes not Francis ? — From the doleful Ci 

They rose, oh ! wherefore should I fear 

He fled, — and, in his flight, could hear 

To tell, or, Lady, you to hear ? 

The death-sounds of the Minster-bell : 

They rose — embraces none were given — 

That sullen stroke pronounced farewell 

They stood like trees when earth and heaven 

To Marmaduke, cut off from pity ! 

Are calm ; they knew each other's worth, 

To Ambrose that ! and then a knell 

And reverently the Band went forth. 

For him, the sweet half-opened Flower ! 

They met, when they had reached the door, 

For all — all dying in one hour ! 

One with profane and harsh intent 

— Why comes not Francis ? Thoughts of love 

Placed there — that he might go before 

Should bear him to his Sister dear 

And, with that rueful Banner borne 

With the fleet motion of a dove ; 

Aloft in sign of taunting scorn, 

Yea, like a heavenly messenger 

Conduct them to their punishment : 

Of speediest wing, should he appear. 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

; Why comes he not ? — for westward fast 
i Along the plain of York he past ; 
j Reckless of what impels or leads, 
i Unchecked he hurries on ; — nor heeds 
I The sorrow, through the Villages, 
i Spread by triumphant cruelties 
i Of vengeful military force, 
 And punishment without remorse. 
j: He marked not, heard not, as he fled ; 
i All but the suffering heart was dead 
| For him abandoned to blank awe, 
i To vacancy, and horror strong : 
i And the first object which he saw, 
; With conscious sight, as he swept along — 
J It was the Banner in his hand ! 
j He felt — and made a sudden stand. 
He looked about like one betrayed : 
What hath he done ? what promise made ? 
i Oh weak, weak moment ! to what end 
, Can such a vain oblation tend, 
And he the Bearer ? — Can he go 
Carrying this instrument of woe, 
. And find, find any where, a right 
To excuse him in his Country's sight? 
i No ; will not all men deem the change 
i A downward course, perverse and strange? 
, Here is it ; — but how  when  must she, 
The unoffending Emily, 
i Again this piteous object see? 
! Such conflict long did he maintain, 
[Nor liberty nor rest could gain : 
[His own life into danger brought 
,By this sad burden — even that thought, 
Exciting self 'suspicion strong 
Swayed the brave man to his wrong. 
And how — unless it were the sense 
Of all-disposing Providence, 
Its will unquestionably shown — 
! How has the Banner clung so fast 
I To a palsied, and unconscious hand ; 
; Clung to the hand to which it passed 
; Without impediment ? And why 
: But that Heaven's purpose might be known 
Doth now no hindrance meet his eye, 
' No intervention, to withstand 
Fulfilment of a Father's prayer 
Breathed to a Son forgiven, and blest 
I When all resentments were at rest, 
I And life in death laid the heart bare ? — 
 Then, like a spectre sweeping by, 
Rushed through his mind the prophecy 
Of utter desolation made 

To Emily in the yew-tree shade : 
He sighed, submitting will and power 
To the stern embrace of that grasping hour. 
" No choice is left, the deed is mine — 
Dead are they, dead ! — and I will go, 
And, for their sakes, come weal or woe, 
Will lay the Relic on the shrine." 
So forward with a steady will 
He went, and traversed plain and hill ; 
And up the vale of Wharf his way 
Pursued ; — and, at the dawn of day, 
Attained a summit whence his eyes 
Could see the Tower of Bolton rise. 
There Francis for a moment's space 
Made halt — but hark ! a noise behind 
Of horsemen at an eager pace ! 
He heard, and with misgiving mind. 
— 'Tis Sir George Bowes who leads the Band : 
They come, by cruel Sussex sent ; 
Who, when the Nortons from the hand 
Of death had drunk their punishment, 
Bethought him, angry and ashamed, 
How Francis, with the Banner claimed 
As his own charge, had disappeared, 
By all the standers-by revered. 
His whole bold carriage (which had quelled 
Thus far the Opposer, and repelled 
All censure, enterprise so bright 
That even bad men had vainly striven 
Against that overcoming light) 
Was then reviewed, and prompt word given, 
That to what place soever fled 
He should be seized, alive or dead. 
The troop of horse have gained the height 
Where Francis stood in open sight. 
They hem him round — u Behold the proof," 
They cried, " the Ensign in his hand ! 
He did not arm, he walked aloof ! 
For why ? — to save his Father's land ; — 
Worst Traitor of them all is he, 
A Traitor dark and cowardly ! " 
"I am no Traitor," Francis said, 
"Though this unhappy freight I bear ; 
And must not part with. But beware ; — 
Err not, by hasty zeal misled, 
Nor do a suffering Spirit wrong, 
Whose self-reproaches are too strong ! " 
At this he from the beaten road 
Retreated towards a brake of thorn, 
That like a place of vantage showed ; 
And there stood bravely, though forlorn. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

In self-defence with warlike brow 
He stood, — nor weaponless was now ; 
He from a Soldier's hand had snatched 
A spear, — and, so protected, watched 
The Assailants, turning round and round ; 
But from behind with treacherous wound 
A Spearman brought him to the ground. 
The guardian lance, as Francis fell, 
Dropped from him ; but his other hand 
The Banner clenched ; till, from out the Band, 
One, the most eager for the prize, 
Rushed in ; and — while, grief to tell ! 
A glimmering sense still left, with eyes 
Unclosed the noble Francis lay — 
Seized it, as hunters seize their prey; 
But not before the warm life-blood 
Had tinged more deeply, as it flowed, 
The wounds the broidered Banner showed, 
Thy fatal work, Maiden, innocent as good ! 
Proudly the Horsemen bore away 
The Standard ; and where Francis lay 
There was he left alone, unwept, 
And for two days unnoticed slept. 
For at that time bewildering fear 
Possessed the eountry, far and near ; 
But, on the third day, passing by 
One of the Norton Tenantry 
Espied the uncovered Corse ; the Man 
Shrunk as he recognised the face, 
And to the nearest homesteads ran 
And called the people to the place.- 
— How desolate is Rylstone-hall ! 
This was the instant thought of all ; 
And if the lonely Lady there 
Should be ; to her they cannot bear 
This weight of anguish and despair. 
So, when upon sad thoughts had prest 
Thoughts sadder still, they deemed it best 
That, if the Priest should yield assent 
And no one hinder their intent, 
Then, they, for Christian pity's sake, 
In holy ground a grave would make ; 
And straightway buried he should be 
In the Church-yard of the Priory. 
Apart, some little space, was made 
The grave where Francis must be laid. 
In no confusion or neglect 
This did they,— but in pure respect 
That he was born of gentle blood ; 
And that there was no neighbourhood 
Of kindred for him in that ground : 
So to the Church-yard they are bound, 

Bearing the body on a bier ; 
And psalms they sing — a holy sound 
That hill and vale with sadness hear. 
But Emily hath raised her head, 
And is again disquieted ; 
She must behold ! — so many gone, 
Where is the solitary One ? 
And forth from Rylstone-hall stepped she, — 
To seek her Brother forth she went, 
And tremblingly her course she bent 
Toward Bolton's ruined Priory. 
She comes, and in the vale hath heard 
The funeral dirge ; — she sees the knot 
Of people, sees them in one spot — 
And darting like a wounded bird 
She reached the grave, and with her breast 
Upon the ground received the rest, — 
The consummation, the whole ruth 
And sorrow of this final truth ! 

CANTO SEVENTH. 
' Powers there are 
That touch each other to the quick — in modes 
Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive, 
No soul to dream of.' 
Thou Spirit, whose angelic hand 
Was to the harp a strong command, 
Called the submissive strings to wake 
In glory for this Maiden's sake, 
Say, Spirit ! whither hath she fled 
To hide her poor afflicted head ? 
What mighty forest in its gloom 
Enfolds her ? — is a rifted tomb 
Within the wilderness her seat ? 
Some island which the wild waves beat — 
Is that the Sufferer's last retreat ? 
Or some aspiring rock, that shrouds 
Its perilous front in mists and clouds ? 
High-climbing rock, low sunless dale, 
Sea, desert, what do these avail ? 
Oh take her anguish and her fears 
Into a deep recess of years ! 
'Tis done ; — despoil and desolation 
O'er Rylstone's fair domain have blown ; 
Pools, terraces, and walks are sown 
With weeds ; the bowers are overthrown, 
Or have given way to slow mutation, 
While, in their ancient habitation 
The Norton name hath been unknown. 
The lordly Mansion of its pride 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

stripped ; the ravage hath spread wide 
'[irough park and field, a perishing 
hat mocks the gladness of the Spring I 
;nd, with this silent gloom agreeing, 
ppears a joyless human Being, 
|f aspect such as if the waste 
!'ere under her dominion placed, 
pon a primrose hank, her throne 
c quietness, she sits alone ; 
:mong the ruins of a wood, 
irewhile a eovert bright and green, 
ad where full many a brave tree stood, 
mt used to spread its boughs, and ring 
i'ith the sweet bird's carolling, 
jhold her, like a virgin Queen, 
eglecting in imperial state 
lese outward images of fate, 
ad carrying inward a serene 
;ad perfect sway, through many a thought 
f chance and change, that hath been brought 
p the subjection of a holy, 
tough stern and rigorous, melancholy ! 
lie like authority, with grace 
 awfulness, is in her face,, — 
,iere hath she fixed it ; yet it seems 
p o'ershadow by no native right 
liat face, which cannot lose the gleams, 
|Dse utterly the tender gleams, 
f gentleness and meek delight, 
[ad loving-kindness ever bright : 
tch is her sovereign mien :— her dress 
li vest with woollen cincture tied, 
hood of mountain- wool undyed) 
homely, — fashioned to express 
: wandering Pilgrim's humbleness. 
And she hath wandered, long and far, 
aieath the light of sun and star j. 
lath roamed in trouble and in grief, 
riven forward like a withered leaf, 
sa like a ship at random blown 
p distant places and unknown. 
'it now she dares to seek a haven. 
!mong her native wilds of Craven ; 
ath seen again her Father's roof,. 
,id put her fortitude to proof ; 
lie mighty sorrow hath been borne, 
id she is thoroughly forlorn : 
jer soul doth in itself stand fast, 
kstained by memory of the past 
|id strength of Reason ; held above 
be infirmities of mortal love ; 
ladaunted, lofty, calm, and stable, 
bd awfully impenetrable. 

And so — beneath a mouldered tree, 
A self-surviving leafless oak 
By unregarded age from stroke 
Of ravage saved — sate Emily. 
There did she rest, with head reclined, 
Herself most like a stately flower, 
(Such have I seen) whom chance of birth 
Hath separated from its kind, 
To live and die in a shady bower, 
Single on the gladsome earth. 
When, with a noise like distant thunder, 
A troop of deer came sweeping by ; 
And, suddenly, behold a wonder ! 
For One, among those rushing deer, 
A single One, in mid career 
Hath stopped, and fixed her large full eye 
Upon the Lady Emily ; 
A Doe most beautiful, clear-white, 
A radiant creature, silver-bright ! 
Thus checked, a little while it stayed ; 
A little thoughtful pause it made ; 
And then advanced with stealth-like pace, 
Drew softly near her, and more near — 
Looked round — but saw no cause for fear ; 
So to her feet the Creature came, 
And laid its head upon her knee, 
And looked into the Lady's face, 
A look of pure benignity, 
And fond unclouded memory. 
It is, thought Emily, the same, 
The very Doe of other years ! — 
The pleading look the Lady viewed, 
And, by her gushing thoughts subdued, 
She melted into tears — 
A flood of tears, that flowed apace, 
Upon the happy Creature's face. 
Oh, moment ever blest ! Pair 
Beloved of Heaven, Heaven's chosen care, 
This was for you a precious greeting ; 
And may it prove a fruitful meeting ! 
Joined are they, and the sylvan Doe 
Can she depart ? can she forego 
The Lady, once her playful peer, 
And now her sainted Mistress dear ? 
And will not Emily receive 
This lovely chronicler of things 
Long past, delights and sorrowings ? 
Lone Sufferer ! will not she believe 
The promise in that speaking face ; 
And welcome, as a gift of giace, 
The saddest thought the Creature brings ? 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

That day, the first of a re-union 

Or in the meadow wandered wide ! 

Which was to teem with high communion, 

How pleased, when down the Straggler sank 

That day of balmy April weather, 

Beside her, on some sunny bank ! 

They tarried in the wood together. 

How soothed, when in thick bower enclosed, 

And when, ere fall of evening dew, 

They, like a nested pair, reposed ! 

She from her sylvan haunt withdrew, 

Fair Vision ! when it crossed the Maid 

The White Doe tracked with faithful pace 

Within some rocky cavern laid, 

The Lady to her dwelling-place ; 

The dark cave's portal gliding by, 

That nook where, on paternal ground, 

White as whitest cloud on high 

A habitation she had found, 

Floating through the azure sky. 

The Master of whose humble board 

—What now is left for pain or fear ? 

Once owned her Father for his Lord ; 

That Presence, dearer and more dear, 

A hut, by tufted trees defended, 

While they, side by side, were straying, 

Where Rylstone brook with Wharf is blended. 

And the shepherd's pipe was playing, 


Did now a very gladness yield 

When Emily by morning light 

At morning to the dewy field, 

Went forth, the Doe stood there in sight. 

And with a deeper peace endued 

She shrunk : — with one frail shock of pain 

The hour of moonlight solitude. 

Received and followed by a prayer, 


She saw the Creature once again ; 

With her Companion, in such frame 

Shun will she not, she feels, will bear ; — 

Of mind, to Rylstone back she came ; 

But, wheresoever she looked round, 

And, ranging through the wasted groves, 

All now was trouble-haunted ground ; 

Received the memory of old loves, 

And therefore now she deems it good 

Undisturbed and undistrest, 

Once more this restless neighbourhood 

Into a soul which now was blest 

To leave. — Unwooed, yet unforbidden, 

With a soft spring-day of holy, 

The White Doe followed up the vale, 

Mild, and grateful, melancholy : 

Up to another cottage, hidden 

Not sunless gloom or unenlightened, 

In the deep fork of Amerdale ; 

But by tender fancies brightened. 

And there may Emily restore 


Herself, in spots unseen before. 

When the bells of Rylstone played 

— Why tell of mossy rock, or tree, 

Their sabbath music — ' <§tf tt£ ZVfcC !' 

By lurking Dernbrook's pathless side, 

That was the sound they seemed to speak ; 

Haunts of a strengthening amity 

Inscriptive legend which I ween 

That calmed her, cheered, and fortified ? 

May on those holy bells be seen, 

For she hath ventured now to read 

That legend and her Grandsire's name ; 

Of time, and place, and thought, and deed — 

And oftentimes the Lady meek 

Endless history that lies 

Had in her childhood read the same ; 

In her silent Follower's eyes ; 

Words which she slighted at that day ; 

Who with a power like human reason 

But now, when such sad change was wrought, 

Discerns the favourable season, 

And of that lonely name she thought, 

Skilled to approach or to retire, — 

The bells of Rylstone seemed to say, 

From looks conceiving her desire ; 

While she sate listening in the shade, 

From look, deportment, voice, or mien, 

With vocal music, ' <©tf tt£ agifC ; ' 

That vary to the heart within. 

And all the hills were glad to bear 

If she too passionately wreathed 

Their part in this effectual prayer. 

Her arms, or over-deeply breathed, 


Walked quick or slowly, every mood 

Nor lacked she Reason's firmest power ; 

In its degree was understood ; 

But with the White Doe at her side 

Then well may their accord be true, 

Up would she climb to Norton Tower, 

And kindliest intercourse ensue. 

And thence look round her far and wide, 

— Oh ! surely 'twas a gentle rousing 

Her fate there measuring ; — all is stilled, — 

When she by sudden glimpse espied 

The weak One hath subdued her heart ; 

The White Doe on the mountain browsing, 

Behold the prophecy fulfilled. 

- 

THE WHITE DOE OF RYLSTONE. 

 

• Fulfilled, and she sustains her part ! 
I But here her Brother's words have failed ; 
 Here hath a milder doom prevailed ; 
That she, of him and all bereft, 
■Hath yet this faithful Partner left ; 
Thii one Associate that disproves 
[His words, remains for her, and loves. 
-If tears are shed, they do not fall 
!For loss of him — for one, or all ; 
Yet, sometimes, sometimes doth she weep 
'Moved gently in her soul's soft sleep ; 
A few tears down her cheek descend 
iFor this her last and living Friend. 
Bless, tender Hearts, their mutual lot, 
And bless for both this savage spot ; 
Which Emily doth sacred hold 
For reasons dear and manifold — 
Here hath she, here before her sight, 
Close to the summit of this height, 
jThe grassy rock-encircled Pound 
lln which the Creature first was found. 
'So beautiful the timid Thrall 
(A spotless Youngling white as foam) 
Her youngest Brother brought it home ; 
The youngest, then a lusty boy, 
Bore it, or led, to Rylstone-hall 
With heart brimful of pride and joy ! 
 But most to Bolton's sacred Pile, 
On favouring nights, she loved to go ; 
There ranged through cloister, court, and aisle, 
Attended by the soft-paced Doe ; 
,Nor feared she in the still moonshine 
To look upon Saint Mary's shrine ; 
Nor on the lonely turf that showed 
Where Francis slept in his last abode. 
i For that she came ; there oft she sate 
Forlorn, but not disconsolate : 
And, when she from the abyss returned 
Of thought, she neither shrunk nor mourned ; 
! Was happy that she lived to greet 
j Her mute Companion as it lay 
; In love and pity at her feet ; 
How happy in its turn to meet 
! The recognition ! the mild glance 
' Beamed from that gracious countenance ; 
Communication, like the ray 
| Of a new morning, to the nature 
And prospects of the inferior Creature ! 
A mortal Song we sing, by dower 
Encouraged of celestial power ; 

Power which the viewless Spirit shed 
By whom we were first visited ; 
Whose voice we heard, whose hand and wings 
Swept like a breeze the conscious strings, 
When, left in solitude, erewhile 
We stood before this ruined Pile, 
And, quitting unsubstantial dreams, 
Sang in this Presence kindred themes ; 
Distress and desolation spread 
Through human hearts, and pleasure dead, — 
Dead — but to live again on earth, 
A second and yet nobler birth ; 
Dire overthrow, and yet how high 
The re-ascent in sanctity ! 
From fair to fairer ; day by day 
A more divine and loftier way ! 
Even such this blessed Pilgrim trod, 
By sorrow lifted towards her God ; 
Uplifted to the purest sky 
Of undisturbed mortality. 
Her own thoughts loved she ; and could bend 
A dear look to her lowly Friend ; 
There stopped ; her thirst was satisfied 
With what this innocent spring supplied : 
Her sanction inwardly she bore, 
And stood apart from human cares : 
But to the world returned no more, 
Although with no unwilling mind 
Help did she give at need, and joined 
The Wharfdale peasants in their prayers. 
At length, thus faintly, faintly tied 
To earth, she was set free, and died. 
Thy soul, exalted Emily, 
Maid of the blasted family, 
Rose to the God from whom it came ! 
— In Rylstone Church her mortal frame 
Was buried by her Mother's side. 
Most glorious sunset ! and a ray 
Survives— the twilight of this day — 
In that fair Creature whom the fields 
Support, and whom the forest shields ; 
Who, having filled a holy place, 
Partakes, in her degree, Heaven's grace ; 
And bears a memory and a mind 
Raised far above the law of kind ; 
Haunting the spots with lonely cheer 
Which her dear Mistress once held dear : 
Loves most what Emily loved most — 
The enclosure of this church-yard ground ; 
Here wanders like a gliding ghost, 
And every sabbath here is found ; 
Comes with the people when the bells 
Are heard among the moorland dells, 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Finds entrance through yon arch, where way 

That one sequestered hillock green, 

Lies open on the sabbath-day ; 

The pensive visitant is seen. 

Here walks amid the mournful waste 

There doth the gentle Creature lie 

Of prostrate altars, shrines defaced, 

With those adversities unmoved ; 

And floors encumbered with rich show 

Calm spectacle, by earth and sky 

Of fret- work imagery laid low ; 

In their benignity approved ! 

Paces softly, or makes halt, 

And aye, methinks, this hoary Pile, 

By fractured cell, or tomb, or vault ; 

Subdued by outrage and decay, 

By plate of monumental brass 

Looks down upon her with a smile, 

Dim-gleaming among weeds and grass, 

A gracious smile, that seems to say — 

And sculptured Forms of Warriors brave : 

" Thou, thou art not a Child of Time, 

But chiefly by that single grave. 

But Daughter of the Eternal Prime ! " 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

IN SERIES. 

PART I. 
FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY INTO BRITAIN, TO THE CONSUMMATION OF THE TAPAL 
DOMINION. 
' A verse may catch a wandering Soul, that flies 
Profounder Tracts, and hy a hlest surprise 
Convert delight into a Sacrifice.' 

INTRODUCTION. 
I, who accompanied with faithful pace 
Cerulean Duddon from his cloud-fed spring, 
And loved with spirit ruled by his to sing 
Of mountain-quiet and boon nature's grace ; 
I, who essayed the nobler Stream to trace 
Of Liberty, and smote the plausive string 
Till the checked torrent, proudly triumphing, 
Won for herself a lasting resting-place ; 
Now seek upon the heights of Time the source 
Of a Holy River, on whose banks are found 
Sweet pastoral flowers, and laurels that have crowned 
Full oft the unworthy brow of lawless force ; 
And, for delight of him who tracks its course, 
Immortal amaranth and palms abound. 

CONJECTURES. 
If there be prophets on whose spirits rest 
Past things, revealed like future, they can tell 
What Powers, presiding o'er the sacred well 
Of Christian Faith, this savage Island blessed 
With its first bounty. Wandering through the west, 
Did holy Paul a while in Britain dwell, 
And call the Fountain forth by miracle, 
And with dread signs the nascent Stream invest ? 
Or He, whose bonds dropped off, whose prison dooi-s 
Flew open, by an Angel's voice unbarred ? 
Or some of humbler name, to these wild shores 
Storm-driven ; who, having seen the cup of woe 
Pass from their Master, sojourned here to guard 
The precious Current they had taught to flow? 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

TREPIDATION OF THE DRUIDS. 
:reams round the Arch-druid's brow the seaniew 
— white 
s Menai's foam ; and toward the mystic ring 
r here Augurs stand, the Future questioning, 
owly the cormorant aims her heavy flight, 
ortending ruin to each baleful rite, 
pat, in the lapse of ages, hath crept o'er 
.'iluvian truths, and patriarchal lore. 
:aughty the Bard : can these meek doctrines blight 
is transports ? wither Ms heroic strains ? 
at all shall be fulfilled ; — the Julian spear 
way first opened ; and, with Roman chains, 
pe tidings come of Jesus crucified ; 
ley come — they spread — the weak, the suffering, 
eceive the faith, and in the hope abide. [hear ; 

DRUIDICAL EXCOMMUNICATION. 
ercy and Love have met thee on thy road, 
jiou wretched Outcast, from the gift of fire 
'ad food cut off by sacerdotal ire, 
i.'om every sympathy that Man bestowed ! 
let shall it claim our reverence, that to God, 
'icient of days ! that to the eternal Sire, 
|iese jealous Ministers of law aspire, 
p to the one sole fount whence wisdom flowed, 
.istice, and order. Tremblingly escaped, 
 if with prescience of the coming storm, 
'.at intimation when the stars were shaped; 
! id still, 'mid yon thick woods, the primal truth 
'immers through many a superstitious form 
mt fills the Soul with unavailing ruth. 

UNCERTAINTY. 
iiRKNESS surrounds us ; seeking, we are lost 
 Snowdon's wilds, amid Brigantian coves, 
• where the solitary shepherd roves 
long the plain of Sarum, by the ghost 
.' Time and shadows of Tradition, crost ; 
id where the boatman of the Western Isles 
ackens his course — to mark those holy piles 
liich yet survive on bleak Iona's coast. 
')r these, nor monuments of eldest name, 
pr Taliesin's unforgotten lays, 
ir characters of Greek or Roman fame, 
P an unquestionable Source have led ; 
lough — if eyes, that sought the fountain-head 
vain, upon the growing Rill may gaze. 
 This water-fowl was, among the Druids, an emhlem of 
,ose traditions connected with the deluge that made an 

PERSECUTION. 
Lament ! for Diocletian's fiery sword 
Works busy as the lightning ; but instinct 
With malice ne'er to deadliest weapon linked, 
Which God's ethereal store-houses afford : 
Against the Followers of the incarnate Lord 
It rages ; — some are smitten in the field — [shield 
Some pierced to the heart through the ineffectual 
Of sacred home ; — with pomp are others gored 
And dreadful respite. Thus was Alban tried, 
England's first Martyr, whom no threats could shake ; 
Self-offered victim, for his friend he died, 
And for the faith ; nor shall his name forsake 
That Hill, whose flowery platform seems to rise 
By Nature decked for holiest sacrifice . 

RECOVERY. 
As, when a storm hath ceased, the birds regain 
Their cheerfulness, and busily retrim 
Their nests, or chant a gratulating hymn 
To the blue ether and bespangled plain ; 
Even so, in many a re-constructed fane, 
Have the survivors of this Storm renewed 
Their holy rites with vocal gratitude : 
And solemn ceremonials they ordain 
To celebrate their great deliverance ; 
Most feelingly instructed 'mid their fear — 
That persecution, blind with rage extreme, [nance, 
May not the less, through Heaven's mild counte- 
Even in her own despite, both feed and cheer ; 
For all things are less dreadful than they seem. 

TEMPTATIONS FROM ROMAN REFINEMENTS. 
Watch, and be firm ! for, soul-subduing vice, 
Heart-killing luxury, on your steps await. 
Fair houses, baths, and banquets delicate, 
And temples flashing, bright as polar ice, 
Their radiance through the woods — may yet suffice 
To sap your hardy virtue, and abate 
Your love of Him upon whose forehead sate 
The crown of thorns ; whose life-blood flowed, the 
price 
Of your redemption. Shun the insidious arts 
That Rome provides, less dreading from her frown 
Than from her wily praise, her peaceful gown, 
Language, and letters ; — these, though fondly viewed 
As humanising graces, are but parts 
And instruments of deadliest servitude ! 

important part of their mysteries. The Cormorant was a 

bird of bad omen 

 See Note. 

- 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION 

DISSENSIONS. 
That heresies should strike (if truth be scanned 
Presumptuously) their roots both wide and deep, 
Is natural as dreams to feverish sleep. 
Lo ! Discord at the altar dares to stand 
Uplifting toward high Heaven her fiery brand, 
A cherished Priestess of the new-baptized ! 
But chastisement shall follow peace despised. 
The Pictish cloud darkens the enervate land 
By Rome abandoned ; vain are suppliant cries, 
And prayers that would undo her forced farewell 
For she returns not. — Awed by her own knell, 
She casts the Britons upon strange Allies, 
Soon to become more dreaded enemies 
Than heartless misery called them to repel. 

STRUGGLE OF THE BRITONS AGAINST THE BARBARIANS. 
Rise ! — they have risen : of brave Aneurin ask 
How they have scourged old foes, perfidious friends : 
The Spirit of Caractacus descends 
Upon the Patriots, animates their task ; — 
Amazement runs before the towering casque 
Of Arthur, bearing through the stormy field 
The virgin sculptured on his Christian shield : — 
Stretched in the sunny light of victory bask 
The Host that followed Urien as he strode 
O'er heaps of slain ; — from Cambrian wood and 
Druids descend, auxiliars of the Cross ; [moss 
Bards, nursed on blue Plinlimmon's still abode, 
Rush on the fight, to harps preferring swords, 
And everlasting deeds to burning words ! 

SAXON CONQUEST. 
Nor wants the cause the panic-striking aid 
Of hallelujahs tost from hill to hill — 
For instant victory. But Heaven's high will 
Permits a second and a darker shade 
Of Pagan night. Afflicted and dismayed, 
The Relics of the sword flee to the mountains : 
wretched Land ! whose tears have flowed like 
fountains ; 
Whose arts and honours in the dust are laid 
By men yet scarcely conscious of a care 
For other monuments than those of Earth ; 
Who, as the fields and woods have given them birth, 
Will build their savage fortunes only there ; 
Content, if foss, and barrow, and the girth 
Of long-drawn rampart, witness what they were. 
 See Note. 

MONASTERY OF OLD BANGOR. 
The oppression of the tumult — wrath and scorn— 
The tribulation — and the gleaming blades — 
Such is the impetuous spirit that pervades 
The song of Taliesin ; — Ours shall mourn [turi 
The unarmed Host who by their prayers wouli 
The sword from Bangor's walls, and guard the ston 
Of Aboriginal and Roman lore, 
And Christian monuments, that now must burn 
To senseless ashes. Mark ! how all things wervi 
From their known course, or vanish like a dram 
Another language spreads from coast to coast ; 
Only perchance some melancholy Stream 
And some indignant Hills old names preserve, 
When laws, and creeds, and people all are lost ! 

CASUAL INCITEMENT. 
A bright-haired company of youthful slaves, 
Beautiful strangers, stand within the pale 
Of a sad market, ranged for public sale, 
Where Tiber's stream the immortal City laves : 
Angli by name ; and not an Angel waves 
His wing who could seem lovelier to man's eye 
Than they appear to holy Gregory ; 
Who, having learnt that name, salvation craves 
For Them, and for their Land. The earnest Sir 
His questions urging, feels, in slender ties 
Of chiming sound, commanding sympathies ; 
De-irians — he would save them from God's Iek 
Subjects of Saxon ./Ella — they shall sing 
Glad HALLE-lujahs to the eternal King ! 

glad tidings. 
For ever hallowed be this morning fair, 
Blest be the unconscious shore on which ye trea> 
And blest the silver Cross, which ye, instead 
Of martial banner, in procession bear ; 
The Cross preceding Him who floats in air, 
The pictured Saviour ! — By Augustin led, 
They come — and onward travel without dread, 
Chanting in barbarous ears a tuneful prayer — 
Sung for themselves, and those whom they wou  
free ! 
Rich conquest waits them : — the tempestuous - 
Of Ignorance, that ran so rough and high 
And heeded not the voice of clashing swords, 
These good men humble by a few bare words, 
And calm with fear of God's divinity. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

iPAULINUS . 
ut, to remote Northumbrian royal Hall, 
:,liere thoughtful Edwin, tutored in the school 
f sorrow, still maintains a heathen rule, 
yho comes with functions apostolical ? 
Lark him, of shoulders curved, and stature tall, 
lack hair, and vivid eye, and meagre cheek, 
is prominent feature like an eagle's beak ; 
' Man whose aspect doth at once appal 
nd strike with reverence. The Monarch leans 
oward the pure truths this Delegate propounds, 
epeatedly his own deep mind he sounds 
/ith careful hesitation, — then convenes 
synod of his Councillors : — give ear, 
nd what a pensive Sage doth utter, hear ! 

PERSUASION. 
Man's life is like a Sparrow, mighty King ! 
,That— while at banquet with your Chiefs you sit 
iHoused near a blazing fire — is seen to flit 
Safe from the wintry tempest. Fluttering, 
Here did it enter ; there, on hasty wing, 
'Flies out, and passes on from cold to cold ; 
But whence it came we know not, nor behold 
i Whither it goes. Even such, that transient Thing, 
I The human Soul ; not utterly unknown 
While in the Body lodged, her warm abode ; 
But from what world She came, what woe or weal 
;n her departure waits, no tongue hath shown ; 
.This mystery if the Stranger can reveal, 
His be a welcome cordially bestowed ! " 
rxvn. 
CONVERSION. 
rompt transformation works the novel Lore ; 
he Council closed, the Priest in full career 
:ides forth, an armed man, and hurls a spear 
o desecrate the Fane which heretofore 
le served in folly. Woden falls, and Thor 
B overturned ; the mace, in battle heaved 
Bo might they dream) till victory was achieved, 
•rops, and the God himself is seen no more, 
emple and Altar sink, to hide their shame 
>niid oblivious weeds. « come to me, 
r e heavy laden /' such the inviting voice 
Jeard near fresh streams J ; and thousands, who 
rejoice 
p the new Bite— the pledge of sanctity, 
hall, by regenerate life, the promise claim. 

 See Note. 

t See Note. 

$ See Note. 

APOLOGY. 
Nor scorn the aid which Fancy oft doth lend 
The Soul's eternal interests to promote : 
Death, darkness, danger, are our natural lot ; 
And evil Spirits may our walk attend 
For aught the wisest know or comprehend ; 
Then be good Spirits free to breathe a note 
Of elevation ; let their odours float 
Around these Converts ; and their glories blend, 
The midnight stars outshining, or the blaze 
Of the noon-day. Nor doubt that golden cords 
Of good works, mingling with the visions, raise 
The Soul to purer worlds : and who the line 
Shall draw, the limits of the power define, 
That even imperfect faith to man affords ? 

PRIMITIVE SAXON CLERGY . 
How beautiful your presence, how benign, 
Servants of God ! who not a thought will share 
With the vain world ; who, outwardly as bare 
As winter trees, yield no fallacious sign 
That the firm soul is clothed with fruit divine ! 
Such Priest, when service worthy of his care 
Has called him forth to breathe the common air, 
Might seem a saintly Image from its shrine 
Descended : — happy are the eyes that meet 
The Apparition ; evil thoughts are stayed 
At his approach, and low-bowed necks entreat 
A benediction from his voice or hand ; 
Whence grace, through which the heart can 
understand, 
And vows, that bind the will, in silence made. 

OTHER INFLUENCES. 
Ah, when the Body, round which in love we clung, 
Is chilled by death, does mutual service fail  
Is tender pity then of no avail ? 
Are intercessions of the fervent tongue 
A waste of hope ? — From this sad source have 
Rites that console the Spirit, under grief [sprung 
Which ill can brook more rational relief : 
Hence, prayers are shaped amiss, and dirges sung 
For Souls wnose doom is fixed ! The way is smooth 
For Power that travels with the human heart : 
Confession mini sters the pang to soothe 
In him who at the ghost of guilt doth start. 
Ye holy Men, so earnest in your care, 
Of your own mighty instruments beware ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

SECLUSION. 
Lance, shield, and sword relinquished — at his side 
A bead-roll, in his hand a clasped book, 
Or staff more harmless than a shepherd's crook, 
The war-worn Chieftain quits the world — to hide 
His thin autumnal locks where Monks abide 
In cloistered privacy. But not to dwell 
In soft repose he comes. Within his cell, 
Round the decaying trunk of human pride, 
At morn, and eve, and midnight's silent hour, 
Do penitential cogitations cling ; 
Like ivy, round some ancient elm, they twine 
In grisly folds and strictures serpentine ; 
Yet, while they strangle, a fair growth they bring, 
For recompence — their own perennial bower. 

CONTINUED. 
Methinks that to some vacant hermitage 
My feet would rather turn— to some dry nook 
Scooped out of living rock, and near a brook 
Hurled down a mountain-cove from stage to stage, 
Yet tempering, for my sight, its bustling rage 
In the soft heaven of a translucent pool ; 
Thence creeping under sylvan arches cool, 
Fit haunt of shapes whose glorious equipage 
Would elevate my dreams. A beechen bowl, 
A maple dish, my furniture should be ; 
Crisp, yellow leaves my bed ; the hooting owl 
My night-watch : nor should e'er the crested fowl 
From thorp or vill his matins sound for me, 
Tired of the world and all its industry. 

REPROOF. 
But what if One, through grove or flowery mead, 
Indulging thus at will the creeping feet 
Of a voluptuous indolence, should meet 
Thy hovering Shade, venerable Bede ! 
The saint, the scholar, from a circle freed 
Of toil stupendous, in a hallowed seat 
Of learning, where thou heard'st the billows beat 
On a wild coast, rough monitors to feed 
Perpetual industry. Sublime Recluse ! 
The recreant soul, that dares to shun the debt 
Imposed on human kind, must first forget 
Thy diligence, thy unrelaxing use 
Of a long life ; and, in the hour of death, 
The last dear service of thy passing breath ! 

 He expired dictating the last words of a translation 
of St. John's Gospel. 

SAXON MONASTERIES, AND LIGHTS AND SHADES OF 
THE RELIGION. 
By such examples moved to unbought pains 
The people work like congregated bees ; 
Eager to build the quiet Fortresses 
Where Piety, as they believe, obtains 
From Heaven a general blessing ; timely rains 
Or needful sunshine ; prosperous enterprise, 
Justice and peace : — bold faith ! yet also rise 
The sacred Structures for less doubtful gains. 
The Sensual think with reverence of the palms 
Which the chaste Votaries seek, beyond the grave 
If penance be redeemable, thence alms 
Flow to the poor, and freedom to the slave ; 
And if full oft the Sanctuary save 
Lives black with guilt, ferocity it calms. 

MISSIONS AND TRAVELS. 
Not sedentary all : there are who roam 
To scatter seeds of life on barbarous shores ; 
Or quit with zealous step their knee-worn floors 
To seek the general mart of Christendom ; 
Whence they, like richly-laden merchants, eon " 
To their beloved cells : — or shall we say 
That, like the Red-cross Knight, they urge their way 
To lead in memorable triumph home 
Truth, their immortal Una ? Babylon, 
Learned and wise, hath perished utterly, 
Nor leaves her Speech one word to aid the sigli 
That would lament her ; — Memphis, Tyre, are gon< 
With all their Arts, — but classic lore glides on 
By these Religious saved for all posterity. 

ALFRED. 
Behold a pupil of the monkish gown, 
The pious Alfred, King to Justice dear ! 
Lord of the harp and liberating spear ; 
Mirror of Princes ! Indigent Renown 
Might range the starry ether for a crown 
Equal to his deserts, who, like the year, 
Pours forth his bounty, like the day doth cheer, 
And awes like night with mercy-tempered frown 
Ease from this noble miser of his time 
No moment steals ; pain narrows not his cares. 
Though small his kingdom as a spark or gem, 
Of Alfred boasts remote Jerusalem, 
And Christian India, through her wide-spread clime 
In sacred converse gifts with Alfred shares. 

 See Note. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 


HIS DESCENDANTS. 
hen thy great soul was freed from mortal chains, 
Irling of England ! many a bitter shower 
 on thy tomb ; but emulative power 
](>wed in thy line through undegenerate veins. 
Se Race of Alfred covet glorious pains 
len dangers threaten, dangers ever new ! 
ick tempests bursting, blacker still in view ! 
]|t manly sovereignty its hold retains ; 
r J root sincere, the branches bold to strive 
' th the fierce tempest, while, within the round 
(;their protection, gentle virtues thrive ; 
i\ oft, 'mid some green plot of open ground, 
I de as the oak extends its dewy gloom, 
I I fostered hyacinths spread their purple bloom. 

INFLUENCE ABUSED. 
,ged by Ambition, who with subtlest skill 
(mges her means, the Enthusiast as a dupe 
Sill soar, and as a hypocrite can stoop, 
K turn the instruments of good to ill, 
ftulding the credulous people to his will. 
Sh Dunstan : — from its Benedictine coop 
Lies the master Mind, at whose fell swoop 
'Ij; chaste affections tremble to fulfil 
l:ir purposes. Behold, pre-signified, 
% Might of spiritual sway ! his thoughts, his 
dreams, 
I in the supernatural world abide : 
Sivaunt a throng of Followers, filled with pride 
I'vvhat they see of virtues pushed to extremes, 
 sorceries of talent misapplied. 

DANISH CONQUESTS. 
\ ie to the Crown that doth the Cowl obey ! 
sension, checking arms that would restrain 
 incessant Rovers of the northern main, 
I.lps to restore and spread a Pagan sway : 
lio Gospel- truth is potent to allay 
'rceness and rage ; and soon the cruel Dane 
wis, through the influence of her gentle reign, 
Ij. native superstitions melt away. 
'is, often, when thick gloom the east o'ershrouds, 
b full-orbed Moon, slow-climbing, doth appear 
'jmtly to consume the heavy clouds ; 
Aw no one can resolve ; but every eye 
mndher sees, while air is hushed, a clear 
d widening circuit of ethereal sky. 
 See Note. 

CANUTE. 
A pleasant music floats along the Mere, 
From Monks in Ely chanting service high, 
While-as Canute the King is rowing by : [near, 
" My Oarsmen," quoth the mighty King, " draw 
" That we the sweet song of the Monks may hear ! " 
He listens (all past conquests and all schemes 
Of future vanishing like empty dreams) 
Heart-touched, and haply not without a tear. 
The Royal Minstrel, ere the choir is still, 
While his free Barge skims the smooth flood along, 
Gives to that rapture an accordant Rhyme. 
suffering Earth ! be thankful ; sternest clime 
And rudest age are subject to the thrill 
Of heavtn-descended Piety and Song. 

THE NORMAN CONQUEST. 
The woman-hearted Confessor prepares 
The evanescence of the Saxon line. 
Hark ! 'tis the tolling Curfew ! — the stars sliine ; 
But of the lights that cherish household cares 
And festive gladness, burns not one that dares 
To twinkle after that dull stroke of thine, 
Emblem and instrument, from Thames to Tyne, 
Of force that daunts, and cunning that ensnares ! 
Yet as the terrors of the lordly bell, 
That quench, from hut to palace, lamps and fires, 
Touch not the tapers of the sacred quires ; 
Even so a thraldom, studious to expel 
Old laws, and ancient customs to derange, 
To Creed or Ritual brings no fatal change. 

Coldly we spake. The Saxons, overpowered 
By wrong triumphant through its own excess, 
From fields laid waste, from house and home 
devoured 
By flames, look up to heaven and crave redress 
From God's eternal justice. Pitiless 
Though men be, there are angels that can feel 
For wounds that death alone has power to heal, 
For penitent guilt, and innocent distress. 
And has a Champion risen in arms to try 
His Country's virtue, fought, and breathes no more ; 
Him in their hearts the people canonize ; 
And far above the mine's most precious ore 
The least small pittance of bare mould they prize 
Scooped from the sacred earth where his dear relics 
he. 

 Which is still extant. 

— 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE COUNCIL OF CLERMONT. 
" And shall," the Pontiff asks, " profaneness flow 
" From Nazareth — source of Christian piety, 
" From Bethlehem, from the Mounts of Agony 
" And glorified Ascension ? Warriors, go, 
 With prayers and blessings we your path will sow; 
" Like Moses hold our hands erect, till ye 
" Have chased far off by righteous victory 
" These sons of Amalek, or laid them low ! " — 
" God willeth it," the whole assembly cry ; 
Shout which the enraptured multitude astounds ! 
The Council-roof and Clermont's towers reply ; — 
" God willeth it," from hill to hill rebounds, 
And, in awe -stricken Countries far and nigh, 
Through Nature's hollow arch ' that voice 
resounds . 

CRUSADES. 
The turbaned Race are poured in thickening swarms 
Along the west ; though driven from Aquitaine, 
The Crescent glitters on the towers of Spain ; 
And soft Italia feels renewed alarms ; 
The scimitar, that yields not to the charms 
Of ease, the narrow Bosphorus will disdain ; 
Nor long (that crossed) would Grecian hills detain 
Their tents, and check the current of their arms. 
Then blame not those who, by the mightiest lever 
Known to the moral world, Imagination, 
Upheave, so seems it, from her natural station 
All Christendom : — they sweep along (was never 
So huge a host !) — to tear from the Unbeliever 
The precious Tomb, their haven of salvation. 


RICHARD I. 
Redoubted King, of courage leonine, 
I mark thee, Richard ! urgent to equip 
Thy warlike person with the staff and scrip ; 
 watch thee sailing o'er the midland brine ; 
In conquered Cyprus see thy Bride decline 
Her blushing cheek, love-vows upon her lip, 
And see love-emblems streaming from thy ship, 
As thence she holds her way to Palestine. 
My Song, a fearless homager, would attend 
Thy thundering battle-axe as it cleaves the press 
Of war, but duty summons her away 
To tell — how, finding in the rash distress 
Of those Enthusiasts a subservient friend, 
To giddier heights hath clomb the Papal sway. 
 The decision of this council was believed to be 
instantly known in remote parts of Europe. 

AN INTERDICT. 
Realms quake by turns : proud Arbitress of gmce 
The Church, by mandate shadowing forth the 
power 
She arrogates o'er heaven's eternal door, 
Closes the gates of every sacred place. 
Straight from the sun and tainted air's embrace 
All sacred things are covered : cheerful morn 
Grows sad as night — no seemly garb is worn, 
Nor is a face allowed to meet a face 
With natural smiles of greeting. Bells are dumb 
Ditches are graves — funereal rites denied ; 
And in the church-yard he must take his bride 
Who dares be wedded ! Fancies thickly come 
Into the pensive heart ill fortified, 
And comfortless despairs the soul benumb. 

PAPAL ABUSES. 
As with the Stream our voyage we pursue, 
The gross materials of this world present 
A marvellous study of wild accident ; 
Uncouth proximities of old and new ; 
And bold transfigurations, more untrue 
(As might be deemed) to disciplined intent 
Than aught the sky's fantastic element, 
When most fantastic, offers to the view. 
Saw we not Henry scourged at Becket's sbriir i 
Lo ! John self-stripped of his insignia : — crown, 
Sceptre and mantle, sword and ring, laid down 
At a proud Legate's feet ! The spears that line 
Baronial halls, the opprobrious insult feel ; 
And angry Ocean roars a vain appeal. 

SCENE IN VENICE. 
Black Demons hovering o'er his mitred head, 
To Caesar's Successor the Pontiff spake ; 
" Ere I absolve thee, stoop ! that on thy neck 
" Levelled with earth this foot of mine may tic:) J 
Then he, who to the altar had been led, 
He, whose strong arm the Orient could notchec 
He, who had held the Soldan at his beck, 
Stooped, of all glory disinherited, 
And even the common dignity of man ! — 
Amazement strikes the crowd : while many tan 
Their eyes away in sorrow, others burn 
With scorn, invoking a vindictive ban 
From outraged Nature ; but the sense of most 
In abject sympathy with power is lost. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

PAPAL DOMINION. 
iiless to Peter's Chair the viewless wind 
lost come and ask permission when to blow, 
hat further empire would it have? for now 
'ghostly Domination, unconfmed 
j that by dreaming Bards to Love assigned, 
Is there in sober truth — to raise the low, 
rplex the wise, the strong to overthrow ; 
trough earth and heaven to bind and to unbind ! — 
!;sist— the thunder quails thee ! — crouch — rebuff 
all be thy recompence ! from land to land 
ie ancient thrones of Christendom are stuff 
r occupation of a magic wand, 
Ld 'tis the Pope that wields it : — whether rough 
smooth his front, our world is in his hand ! 

PART II. 
TO THE CLOSE OF THE TROUBLES IN THE REIGN OF 
CHARLES I. 

)W soon — alas ! did Man, created pure — 
Angels guarded, deviate from the hue 
escribed to duty : — woeful forfeiture 
) made by wilful breach of law divine. 
ith like perverseness did the Church abjure 
edience to her Lord, and haste to twine, 
id Heaven-born flowers that shall -for aye eudure, 
eeds on whose front the world had fixed her sign. 
Man, — if with thy trials thus it fares, 
good can smooth the way to evil choice, 
"om all rash censure be the mind kept free ; 
 only judges right who weighs, compares, 
id, in the sternest sentence which his voice 
onounces, ne'er abandons Charity. 

om false assumption rose, and fondly hail'd 
• superstition, spread the Papal power ; 
it do not deem the Autocracy prevail'd 
ms only, even in error's darkest hour. [tower 
e daunts, forth-thundering from her spiritual 
■ute rapine, or with gentle lure she tames, 
stice and Peace through Her uphold their claims ; 
id Chastity finds many a sheltering bower. 
;alm there is none that if controul'd or sway'd 
' her commands partakes not, in degree, 
good, o'er manners arts and arms, diffused : 
;s, to thy domination, Roman See, 
io' miserably, oft monstrously, abused 
' blind ambition, be this tribute paid. 



CISTERTIAN MONASTERY. 
" Here Man more purely lives, less oft cloth fall, 
" More promptly rises, walks with stricter heed, 
"More safely rests, dies happier, is freed 
" Earlier from cleansing fires, and gains withal 
"A brighter crown." — On yon Cistertian wall 
That confident assurance may be read ; 
And, to like shelter, from the world have fled 
Increasing multitudes. The potent call 
Doubtless shall cheat full oft the heart's desires ; 
Yet, while the rugged Age on pliant knee 
Vows to rapt Fancy humble fealty, 
A gentler life spreads round the holy spires ; 
Where'er they rise, the sylvan waste retires, 
And aery harvests crown the fertile lea. 

Deplorable his lot who tills the ground, 
His whole life long tills it, with heartless toil 
Of villain-service, passing with the soil 
To each new Master, like a steer or hound, 
Or like a rooted tree, or stone earth-bound ; 
But mark how gladly, through their own domains, 
The Monks relax or break these iron chains ; 
While Mercy, uttering, through their voice, a sound 
Echoed in Heaven, cries out, " Ye Chiefs, abate 
These legalized oppressions ! Man — whose name 
And nature God disdained not ; Man — whose soul 
Christ died for — cannot forfeit his high claim 
To live and move exempt from all controul 
Which fellow-feeling doth not mitigate !" 

MONKS AND SCHOOLMEN. 
Record we too, with just and faithful pen, 
That many hooded Cenobites there are, 
Who in their private cells have yet a care 
Of public quiet ; unambitious Men, 
Counsellors for the world, of piercing ken ; 
Whose fervent exhortations from afar 
Move Princes to their duty, peace or war ; 
And oft-times in the most forbidding den 
Of solitude, with love of science strong, 
How patiently the yoke of thought they bear ! 
How subtly glide its finest threads along ! 
Spirits that crowd the intellectual sphere 
With mazy boundaries, as the astronomer 
With orb and cycle girds the starry throng. 


 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

OTHER BENEFITS. 
And, not in vain embodied to the sight, 
Religion finds even in the stern retreat 
Of feudal sway her own appropriate seat ; 
From the collegiate pomps on Windsor's height 
Down to the humbler altar, which the Knight 
And his Retainers of the embattled hall 
Seek in domestic oratory small, 
For prayer in stillness, or the chanted rite ; 
Then chiefly dear, when foes are planted round, 
Who teach the intrepid guardians of the place — 
Hourly exposed to death, with famine worn, 
And suffering under many a perilous wound — 
How sad would be their durance, if forlorn 
Of offices dispensing heavenly grace ! 

CONTINUED. 
And what melodious sounds at times prevail ! 
And, ever and anon, how bright a gleam 
Pours on the surface of the turbid Stream ! 
What heartfelt fragrance mingles with the gale 
That swells the bosom of our passing sail ! 
For where, but on this River's margin, blow 
Those flowers of chivalry, to bind the brow 
Of hardihood with wreaths that shall not fail ? — 
Fair Court of Edward ! wonder of the world ! 
I see a matchless blazonry unfurled 
Of wisdom, magnanimity, and love ; 
And meekness tempering honourable pride ; 
The lamb is couching by the lion's side, 
And near the flame-eyed eagle sits the dove. 

CRUSADERS. 
Furl we the sails, and pass with tardy oars 
Through these bright regions, casting many a glance 
Upon the dream-like issues — the romance 
Of many-coloured life that Fortune pours 
Round the Crusaders, till on distant shores 
Their labours end ; or they return to he, 
The vow performed, in cross-legged effigy, 
Devoutly stretched upon their chancel floors. 
Am I deceived ? Or is their requiem chanted 
By voices never mute when Heaven unties 
Her inmost, softest, tenderest harmonies ; 
Requiem which Earth takes up with voice undaunted, 
When she would tell how Brave, and Good, and 
Wise, 
For their high guerdon not in vain have panted ! 

As faith thus sanctified the warrior's crest 
While from the Papal Unity there came, 
What feebler means had fail'd to give, one aim 
Diffused thro' all the regions of the West ; 
So does her Unity its power attest 
By works of Art, that shed, on the outward frame 
Of worship, glory and grace, which who shall blame 
That ever looked to heaven for final rest ? 
Hail countless Temples ! that so well befit 
Your ministry ; that, as ye rise and take 
Form spirit and character from holy writ, 
Give to devotion, wheresoe'er awake, 
Pinions of high and higher sweep, and make 
The unconverted soul with awe submit. 

Where long and deeply hath been fixed the root 
In the blest soil of gospel truth, the Tree, 
(Blighted or scathed tho' many branches be, 
Put forth to wither, many a hopeful shoot) 
Can never cease to bear celestial fruit. 
Witness the Church that oft times, with effect 
Dear to the saints, strives earnestly to eject 
Her bane, her vital energies recruit. 
Lamenting, do not hopelessly repine 
When such good work is doomed to be undone, 
The conquests lost that were so hardly won : — 
All promises vouchsafed by Heaven will shine 
In light confirmed while years their course shall run 
Confirmed alike in progress and decline. 


TR A NSU BST ANTI ATI ON. 
Enough ! for see, with dim association 
The tapers burn ; the odorous incense feeds 
A greedy flame ; the pompous mass proc: eds ; 
The Priest bestows the appointed consecration ; 
And, while the Host is raised, its elevation 
An awe and supernatural horror breeds ; 
And all the people bow their heads, hke reeds 
To a soft breeze, in lowly adoration. 
This Valdo brooks not. On the banks of Rhone 
He taught, till persecution chased him thence, 
To adore the Invisible, and Him alone. 
Nor are his Followers loth to seek defence, 
Mid woods and wilds, on Nature's craggy throne, 
From rites that trample upon soul and sense. 

I 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

THE TAUDOIS. 
T whence came they who for the Saviour Lord 
ave long borne witness as the Scriptures teach ? — 
es ere Valdo raised his voice to preach 
Gallic ears the unadulterate Word, 
leir fugitive Progenitors explored 
ibalpine vales, in quest of safe retreats 
■ here that pure Church survives, though summer 
heats 
oen a passage to the Romish sword, 
tr as it dares to follow. Herbs self-sown, 
:d fruitage gathered from the chesnut wood, 
jurish the sufferers then ; and mists, that brood 
er chasms with new-fallen obstacles bestrown, 
■otect them ; and the eternal snow that daunts 
iens, is God's good winter for their haunts. 

liiSEDbethe Rivers, from their mountain springs 
iouting to Freedom, "Plant thy banners here !" 
t harassed Piety, " Dismiss thy fear, 
lid in our caverns smooth thy ruffled wings ! " 
)r be unthanked their final lingerings — 
,.ent, but not to high-souled Passion's ear — 
Lid reedy fens wide-spread and marshes drear, 
leir own creation. Such glad welcomings 
I Po was heard to give where Venice rose 
>iled from aloft those Heirs of truth divine 
ho near his fountains sought obscure repose, 
fet came prepared as glorious lights to shine, 
jould that be needed for their sacred Charge ; 
est Prisoners They, whose spirits were at large ! 

WALDENSES. 
iiosE had given earliest notice, as the lark 
rings from the ground the morn to gratulate ; 
rather rose the day to antedate, 
I striking out a solitary spark, [dark. — 
hen all the world with midnight gloom was 
en followed the Waldensian bands, whom Hate 
vain endeavours to exterminate, 
horn Obloquy pursues with hideous bark : 
j.t they desist not ;— and the sacred fire, 
kindled thus, from dens and savage woods 
j>ves, handed on with never-ceasing care, 
irough courts, through camps, o'er hmitary floods ; 
•r lacks this sea-girt Isle a timely share 
the new Flame, not suffered to expire. 
# See Note. 

ARCHBISHOP CHICHELY TO HENRY V. 
"What beast in wilderness or cultured field 
" The lively beauty of the leopard shows ? 
" What flower in meadow-ground or garden grows 
" That to the towering lily doth not yield ? 
" Let both meet only on thy royal shield ! 
"Go forth, great King! claim what thy birth bestows ; 
"Conquer the Gallic lily winch thy foes 
"Dare to usurp ; — thou hast a sword to wield, 
"And Heaven will crown the right." — The mitred 
Sire 
Thus spake— and lo ! a Fleet, for Gaul addrest, 
Ploughs her bold course across the wondering seas ; 
For, sooth to say, ambition, in the breast 
Of youthful heroes, is no sullen fire, 
But one that leaps to meet the fanning breeze. 

WARS OF YORK AND LANCASTER. 
Thus is the storm abated by the craft 
Of a shrewd Counsellor, eager to protect [checked, 
The Church, whose power hath recently been 
Whose monstrous riches threatened. So the shaft 
Of victory mounts high, and blood is quaffed 
In fields that rival Cressy and Poictiers — 
Pride to be washed away by bitter tears ! 
For deep as hell itself, the avenging draught 
Of civil slaughter. Yet, while temporal power 
Is by these shocks exhausted, spiritual truth 
Maintains the else endangered gift of life ; 
Proceeds from infancy to lusty youth ; 
And, under cover of this woeful strife, 
Gathers unblighted strength from hour to hour. 

WICLIFFE. 
Once more the Church is seized with sudden fear, 
And at her call is Wicliffe disinhumed : 
Yea, his dry bones to ashes are consumed 
And flung into the brook that travels near ; [hear 
Forthwith, that ancient Voice which Streams can 
Thus speaks (that Voice which walks upon the wind, 
Though seldom heard by busy human kind) — 
" As thou these ashes, little Brook ! wilt bear 
"Into the Avon, Avon to the tide 
" Of Severn, Severn to the narrow seas, 
" Into main Ocean they, this deed accurst 
"An emblem yields to friends and enemies 
"How the bold Teacher's Doctrine, sanctified 
"By truth, shall spread, throughout the world 
dispersed." 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

CORRUPTIONS OF THE HIGHER CLERGY. 
" Woe to you, Prelates ! rioting in ease 
" And cumbrous wealth — the shame of your estate; 
" You, on whose progress dazzling trains await 
" Of pompous horses ; whom vain titles please ; 
" Who will he served by others on their knees, 
" Yet will yourselves to God no service pay ; 
" Pastors who neither take nor point the way 
" To Heaven ; for, either lost in vanities 
." Ye have no skill to teach, or if ye know 
" And speak the word " Alas ! of fearful 
things 
'Tis the most fearful when the people's eye 
Abuse hath cleared from vain imaginings ; 
And taught the general voice to prophesy 
Of Justice armed, and Pride to be laid low. 

ABUSE OF MONASTIC POWER. 
And what is Penance with her knotted thong ; 
Mortification with the shirt of hair, 
Wan cheek, and knees indurated with prayer, 
Vigils, and fastings rigorous as long ; 
If cloistered Avarice scruple not to wrong 
The pious, humble, useful Secular, 
And rob the people of his daily care, 
Scorning that world whose blindness makes her 

Inversion strange ! that, unto One who lives 
For self, and struggles with himself alone, 
The amplest share of heavenly favour gives ; 
That to a Monk allots, both hi the esteem 
Of God and man, place higher than to him 
Who on the good of others builds his own ! 

MONASTIC VOLUPTUOUSNESS. 
Yet more, — round many a Convent's blazing fire 
Unhallowed threads of revelry are spun ; 
There Venus sits disguised like a Nun, — 
While Bacchus, clothed in semblance of a Friar, 
Pours out his choicest beverage high and higher 
Sparkling, until it cannot choose but run 
Over the bowl, whose silver lip hath won 
An instant kiss of masterful desire — 
To stay the precious waste. Through every brain 
The domination of the sprightly juice 
Spreads high conceits to madding Fancy dear, 
Till the arched roof, with resolute abuse 
Of its grave echoes, swells a choral strain, 
Whose votive burthen is — " Our kingdom 's here !" 

DISSOLUTION OF THE MONASTERIES. 
Threats come which no submission may assuage; 
No sacrifice avert, no power dispute ; 
The tapers shall be quenched, the belfries mute, 
And, 'mid their choirs um'oofed by selfish rage, 
The warbling wren shall find a leafy cage ; 
The gadding bramble hang her purple fruit ; 
And the green lizard and the gilded newt 
Lead unmolested lives, and die of age. 
The owl of evening and the woodland fox 
For their abode the shrines of Waltham choose : 
Proud Glastonbury can no more refuse 
To stoop her head before these desperate shocks- 
She whose high pomp displaced, as story teUs, 
Arimathean Joseph's wattled cells. 

the same subject. 
The lovely Nun (submissive, but more meek 
Through saintly habit than from effort due 
To unrelenting mandates that pursue 
With equal wrath the steps of strong and weak) 
Goes forth — unveiling timidly a cheek 
Suffused with blushes of celestial hue, 
While through the Convent's gate to open view 
Softly she glides, another home to seek. 
Not Iris, issuing from her cloudy shrine, 
An Apparition more divinely bright ! 
Not more attractive to the dazzled sight 
Those watery glories, on the stormy brine 
Poured forth, while summer suns at distance shini 
And the green vales lie hushed in sober light ! 

CONTINUED. 
Yet many a Novice of the cloistral shade, 
And many chained by vows, with eager glee 
The warrant hail, exulting to be free ; 
Like ships before whose keels, full long embaved 
In polar ice, propitious winds have made 
Unlooked-for outlet to an open sea, 
Their liquid world, for bold discovery, 
In all her quarters temptingly displayed ! 
Hope guides the young ; but when the old pu| 
pass 
The threshold, whither shall they turn to fiud 
The hospitality — the alms (alas ! 
Alms may be needed) which that House bestowed 
Can they, in faith and worship, train the mind 
To keep this new and questionable road ? 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

V e, too, must fly before a chasing hand, 
Angels and Saints, in every hamlet mourned ! 
h ! if the old idolatry be spurned, 
,et not your radiant Shapes desert the Land : 
ler adoration was not your demand, 
•.'he fond heart proffered it — the servile heart ; 
>in& therefore are ye summoned to depart, 
i/Kchael, and thou, St. George, whose flaming brand 
'he Dragon quelled ; and valiant Margaret 
Vhose rival sword a like Opponent slew : 
md rapt Cecilia, seraph-haunted Queen 
)f harmony ; and weeping Magdalene, 
Vho in the penitential desert met 
Jales sweet as those that over Eden blew ! 

THE VIRGIN. 
Mother ! whose virgin bosom was uncrost 
With the least shade of thought to sin allied ; 
iVoman ! above all women glorified, 
)ur tainted nature's solitary boast; 
 urer than foam on central ocean tost ; 
brighter than eastern skies at daybreak strewn 
./Vith fancied roses, than the unblemished moon 
efore her wane begins on heaven's blue coast ; 
thy Image falls to earth. Yet some, I ween, 
Not unforgiven the suppliant knee might bend, 
A.s to a visible Power, in which did blend 
ill that was mixed and reconciled in Thee 
Of mother's love with maiden purity, 
)f high with low, celestial with terrene ! 

XXVI. 
APOLOGY. 
"f ot utterly unworthy to endure 
..Vas the supremacy of crafty Rome ; 
lige after age to the arch of Christendom 
Serial keystone haughtily secure ; 
Supremacy from Heaven transmitted pure, 
Is many hold; and, therefore, to the tomb 
.^assjsome through fire— and by the scaffold some- 
-iike saintly Fisher, and unbending More. 
i Lightly for both the bosom's lord did sit 
! Upon his throne ; ' unsoftened, undismayed 
Py aught that mingled with the tragic scene 
pf pity or fear; and More's gay genius played 
IvVith the inoffensive sword of native wit, 
,rhan the bare axe more luminous and keen. 

IMAGINATIVE REGRETS. 
Deep is the lamentation ! Not alone 
From Sages justly honoured by mankind; 
But from the ghostly tenants of the wind, 
Demons and Spirits, many a dolorous groan 
Issues for that dominion overthrown : 
Proud Tiber grieves, and far-off Ganges, blind 
As his own worshippers : and Nile, reclined 
Upon his monstrous urn, the farewell moan 
Renews. Through every forest, cave, and den, 
Where frauds were hatched of old, hath sorrow 
past — 
Hangs o'er the Arabian Prophet's native Waste, 
Where once his airy helpers schemed and planned 
Mid spectral lakes bemocking thirsty men, 
And stalking pillars built of fiery sand. 

REFLECTIONS. 
Grant, that by this unsparing hurricane 
Green leaves with yellow mixed are torn away, 
And goodly fruitage with the mother spray ; 
'Twere madness — wished we, therefore, to detain, 
With hands stretched forth in mollified disdain, 
The ' trumpery' that ascends in bare display — 
Bulls, pardons, relics, cowls black, white, and grey — 
Upwhirled, and flying o'er the ethereal plain 
Fast bound for Limbo Lake. And yet not choice 
But habit rules the unreflecting herd, 
And airy bonds are hardest to disown ; 
Hence, with the spiritual sovereignty transferred 
Unto itself, the Crown assumes a voice 
Of reckless mastery, hitherto unknown. 

TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE. 
But, to outweigh all harm, the sacred Book, 
In dusty sequestration wrapt too long, 
Assumes the accents of our native tongue ; 
And he who guides the plough, or wields the crook, 
With understanding spirit now may look 
Upon her records, listen to her song, 
And sift her laws — much wondering that the wrong, 
Which Faith has suffered, Heaven could calmly 
brook. 
Transcendent boon ! noblest that earthly King 
Ever bestowed to equalize and bless 
Under the weight of mortal wretchedness ! 
But passions spread like plagues, and thousands wild 
With bigotry shall tread the Offering 
Beneath their feet, detested and defiled. 
y  

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE POINT AT ISSUE, 
For what contend the wise ? — for nothing less 
Than that the Soul, freed from the bonds of Sense, 
And to her God restored by evidence 
Of things not seen, drawn forth from their recess, 
Root there, and not in forms, her holiness ; — ■ 
For Faith, which to the Patriarchs did dispense 
Sure guidance, ere a ceremonial fence 
Was needful round men thirsting to transgress ; — 
For Faith, more perfect still, with which the Lord 
Of all, himself a Spirit, in the youth 
Of Christian aspiration, deigned to fill 
The temples of their hearts who, with his word 
Informed, were resolute to do his will, 
And worship him in spirit and in truth. 

EDWARD VI. 
' Sweet is the holiness of Youth' — so felt 
Time-honoured Chaucer speaking through that Lay 
By which the Prioress beguiled the way, 
And many a Pilgrim's rugged heart did melt. 
Hadst thou, loved Bard ! whose spirit often dwelt 
In the clear land of vision, but foreseen 
King, child, and seraph, blended in the mien 
Of pious Edward kneeling as he knelt 
In meek and simple infancy, what joy 
For universal Christendom had thrilled 
Thy heart ! what hopes inspired thy genius, skilled 
( great Precursor, genuine morning Star) 
The lucid shafts of reason to employ, 
Piercing the Papal darkness from afar ! 

EDWARD SIGNING THE WARRANT FOR THE 
EXECUTION OF JOAN OF KENT. 
The tears of man in various measure gush 
From various sources ; gently overflow 
From blissful transport some — from clefts of woe 
Some with ungovernable impulse rush ; 
And some, coeval with the earliest blush 
Of infant passion, scarcely dare to show 
Their pearly lustre — coming but to go ; 
And some break forth when others' sorrows crush 
The sympathising heart. Nor these, nor yet 
The noblest drops to admiration known, 
To gratitude, to injuries forgiven — 
Claim Heaven's regard like waters that have wet 
The innocent eyes of youthful Monarchs driven 
To pen the mandates, nature doth disown. 

REVIVAL OF POPERT. 
The saintly Youth has ceased to rule, discrowned 
By unrelenting Death. People keen 
For change, to whom the new looks always green ! 
Rejoicing did they cast upon the ground 
Then.' G ods of wood and stone ; and, at the sound 
Of counter-proclamation, now are seen, 
(Proud triumph is it for a sullen Queen !) 
Lifting them up, the worship to confound 
Of the Most High. Again do they invoke 
The Creature, to the Creature glory give ; 
Again with frankincense the altars smoke 
Like those the Heathen served ; and mass is sung ; 
And prayer, man's rational prerogative, 
Runs through blind channels of an unknown tongue. 

LATIMER AND RIDLEY. 
How fast the Marian death-list is unrolled ! 
See Latimer and Ridley in the might 
Of Faith stand coupled for a common flight ! 
One (like those prophets whom God sent of old) 
Transfigured , from this kindling hath foretold 
A torch of inextinguishable light ; 
The Other gains a confidence as bold ; 
And thus they foil their enemy's despite. 
The penal instruments, the shows of crime, 
Are glorified while this once-mitred pair 
Of saintly Friends the ' murtherer's chain partake 
Corded, and burning at the social stake:' 
Earth never witnessed object more sublime 
In constancy, in fellowship more fair ! 

Outstretching flame-ward his upbraided hand 
( God of mercy, may no earthly Seat 
Of judgment such presumptuous doom repeat !) 
Amid the shuddering throng doth Cranmer stand 
Firm as the stake to which with iron band 
His frame is tied ; firm from the naked feet 
To the bare head. The victory is complete ; 
The shrouded Body to the Soul's command 
Answers with more than Indian fortitude, 
Through all her nerves with finer sense endued, 
Till breath departs in blissful aspiration : 
Then, 'mid the ghastly ruins of the fire, 
Behold the unalterable heart entire, 
Emblem of faith untouched, miraculous attesi 

 See Note. 
 For the belief in this fact, see the contemporary Hu 
torians. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

GENERAL VIEW OF THE TROUBLES OF THE 
REFORMATION. 
lid, glorious Martyrs, from your fields of light, 
•ur mortal ken ! Inspire a perfect trust 
While we look round) that Heaven's decrees are 
^liich few can hold committed to a fight [just : 
hat shows, ev'n on its better side, the might 
If proud Self-will, Rapacity, and Lust, 
did clouds enveloped of polemic dust, 
 i^hich showers of blood seem rather to incite 
han to allay. Anathemas are hurled 
rom both sides ; veteran thunders (the brute test 
•f truth) are met by fulminations new — 
artarean flags are caught at, and unfurled — 
riends strike at friends — the flying shall pursue — 
nd Victory sickens, ignorant where to rest ! 

ENGLISH REFORMERS IN EXILE. 
cattering, like birds escaped the fowler's net, 
ome seek with timely flight a foreign strand ; 
tost happy, re-assembled in a land 
W dauntless Luther freed, could they forget 
heir Country's woes. But scarcely have they met, 
;artners in faith, and brothers in distress, 
ree to pour forth their common thankfulness, 
re hope declines : — their union is beset 
ith speculative notions rashly sown, 
hence thickly-sprouting growth of poisonous 
weeds ; 
eir forms are broken staves ; their passions, 
at master them. How enviably blest [steeds 
'•> he who can, by help of grace, enthrone 
he peace of God within his single breast ! 

ELIZABETH. 
ail, Virgin Queen ! o'er many an envious bar 
riumphant, snatched from many a treacherous 
 hail, sage Lady, whom a grateful Isle [wile ! 
ath blest, respiring from that dismal war 
illed by thy voice ! But quickly from afar 
efiance breathes with more malignant aim ; 
nd alien storms with home-bred ferments claim 
ortentous fellowship. Her silver car, 
y sleepless prudence ruled, glides slowly on ; 
|Uhurt by violence, from menaced taint 
jtnerging pure, and seemingly more bright : 
ih ! wherefore yields it to a foul constraint 
 Jack as the clouds its beams dispersed, while shone, 
y men and angels blest, the glorious light  

EMINENT REFORMERS. 
Methinks that I could trip o'er heaviest soil, 
Light as a buoyant bark from wave to wave, 
Were mine the trusty staff that Jewel gave 
To youthful Hooker, in familiar style 
The gift exalting, and with playful smile : 
For thus equipped, and bearing on his head 
The Donor's farewell blessing, can he dread 
Tempest, or length of way, or weight of toil ? — 
More sweet than odours caught by him who sails 
Near spicy shores of Araby the blest, 
A thousand times more exquisitely sweet, 
The freight of holy feeling which we meet, 
In thoughtful moments, wafted by the gales 
From fields where good men walk, or bowers 
wherein they rest. 


THE SAME. 
Holy and heavenly Spirits as they are, 
Spotless in life, and eloquent as wise, 
With what entire affection do they prize [care 
Their Church reformed ! labouring with earnest 
To baffle all that may her strength impair ; 
That Church, the unperverted Gospel's seat ; 
In their afflictions a divine retreat ; [prayer ! — 
Source of their liveliest hope, and tenderest 
The truth exploring with an equal mind, 
In doctrine and communion they have sought 
Firmly between the two extremes to steer ; 
But theirs the wise man's ordinary lot, 
To trace right courses for the stubborn blind, 
And prophesy to ears that will not hear. 

DISTRACTIONS. 
Men, who have ceased to reverence, soon defy 
Their forefathers ; lo ! sects are formed, and split 
With morbid restlessness ; — the ecstatic fit 
Spreads wide ; though special mysteries multiply, 
The Saints must govern, is their common cry ; 
And so they labour, deeming Holy Writ 
Disgraced by aught that seems content to sit 
Beneath the roof of settled Modesty. 
The Romanist exults ; fresh hope he draws 
From the confusion, craftily incites 
The overweening, personates the mad- 
To heap disgust upon the worthier Cause : 
Totters the Throne ; the new-born Church is sad 
For every wave against her peace unites. 

 G 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

GUNPOWDER PLOT. 
Fear hath a hundred eyes that all agree 
To plague her heating heart ; and there is one 
(Nor idlest that !) which holds communion 
With things that were not, yet were meant to be. 
Aghast within its gloomy cavity 
That eye (which sees as if fulfilled and done 
Crimes that might stop the motion of the sun) 
Beholds the horrible catastrophe 
Of an assembled Senate unredeemed 
From subterraneous Treason's darkling power : 
Merciless act of sorrow infinite ! 
Worse than the product of that dismal night, 
When gushing, copious as a thunder-shower, 
The blood of Huguenots through Paris streamed. 

ILLUSTRATION. 
THE JUNG-FRAU AND THE PALL OF THE RHINE NEAR 
SCHAFFHAOSEN. 
The Virgin Mountain , wearing like a Queen 
A brilliant crown of everlasting snow, 
Sheds ruin from her sides ; and men below 
Wonder that aught of aspect so serene 
Can link with desolation. Smooth and green, 
And seeming, at a little distance, slow, 
The waters of the Rhine ; but on they go 
Fretting and whitening, keener and more keen ; 
Till madness seizes on the whole wide Flood, 
Turned to a fearful Thing whose nostrils breathe 
Blasts of tempestuous smoke — wherewith he tries. 
To hide himself, but only magnifies ; 
And doth in more conspicuous torment writhe, 
Deafening the region in his ireful mood. 

TROUBLES OF CHARLES THE FIRST. 
Even such the contrast that, where'er we move, 
To the mind's eye Religion doth present ; 
Now with her own deep quietness content ; 
Then, like the mountain, thundering from above 
Against the ancient pine-trees of the grove 
And the Land's humblest comforts. Now her 
Recals the transformation of the flood, [mood 
Whose rage the gentle skies in vain reprove, 
Earth cannot check. terrible excess 
Of headstrong will ! Can this be Piety ? 
No — some fierce Maniac hath usurped her name ; 
And scourges England struggling to be free : 
Her peace destroyed ! her hopes a wilderness ! 
Her blessings cursed— her glory turned to shame! 

 The Jung-frau. 

XLV. 
LAUD . 
Prejudged by foes determined not to spare, 
An old weak Man for vengeance thrown aside, 
Laud, • in the painful art of dying ' tried, 
(Like a poor bird entangled in a snare 
Whose heart still flutters, though his wings forbear 
To stir in useless struggle) hath relied 
On hope that conscious innocence supplied, 
And in. his prison breathes celestial air. 
Why tarries then thy chariot ? Wherefore staff, 
Death ! the ensanguined yet triumphant wheeis 
Which thou prepar'st, full often, to convey 
(What time a State with madding faction reels) 
The Saint or Patriot to the world that heals 
All wounds, all perturbations doth allay ? 

AFFLICTIONS OF ENGLAND. 
Harp ! could'st thou venture, on thy boldest string 
The faintest note to echo which the blast 
Caught from the hand of Moses as it pass'd 
O'er Sinai's top, or from the Shepherd-king, 
Early awake, by Siloa's brook, to sing 
Of dread Jehovah ; then, should wood and waste 
Hear also of that name, and mercy cast 
Off to the mountains, like a covering 
Of which the Lord was weary. Weep, oh ! wee 
Weep with the good, beholding King and Priest 
Despised by that stern God to whom they raise 
Their suppliant hands ; but holy is the feast 
He keepeth ; like the firmament his ways : 
His statutes like the chambers of the deep. 

PART III. 
FROM THE RESTORATION TO THE PRESENT TIMB. 
I. 
I saw the figure of a lovely Maid 
Seated alone beneath a darksome tree, 
Whose fondly-overhanging canopy 
Set off her brightness with a pleasing shade. 
No Spirit was she ; that my heart betrayed, 
For she was one I loved exceedingly ; 
But while I gazed in tender reverie 
(Or was it sleep that with my Fancy played ?) 
The bright corporeal presence — form and face- 
Remaining still distinct grew thin and rare, 
Like sunny mist ; — at length the golden hair, 
Shape, limbs, and heavenly features, keeping pC 
Each with the other in a fingering race 
Of dissolution, melted into air. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

PATRIOTIC SYMPATHIES. 

Last night, without a voice, that Vision spake 
Fear to my Soul, and sadness which might seem 
Wholly dissevered from our present theme ; 
Yet, my beloved Country ! I partake 
Of kindred agitations for thy sake ; 
Thou, too, dost visit oft my midnight dream ; 
,Thy glory meets me with the earliest beam 
Of light, which tells that Morning is awake. 
If aught impair thy beauty or destroy, 
Or but forebode destruction, I deplore 
With filial love the sad vicissitude ; 
If thou hast fallen, and righteous Heaven restore 
The prostrate, then my spring-time is renewed, 
And sorrow bartered for exceeding joy. 

CHARLES THE SECOND. 
Who comes — with rapture greeted, and caress'd 
I With frantic love — his kingdom to regain? 
Him Virtue's Nurse, Adversity, in vain 
Received, and fostered in her iron breast : 
For all she taught of hardiest and of best, 
Or would have taught, by discipline of pain 
And long privation, now dissolves amain, 
Or is remembered only to give zest 
To wantonness. — Away, Circean revels ! 
iBut for what gain ? if England soon must sink 
Into a gulf which all distinction levels — 
That bigotry may swallow the good name, 
And, with that draught, the life-blood : misery, 
! shame, 
By Poets loathed ; from which Historians shrink ! 

LA TITUDINARI ANISM. 
Yet Truth is keenly sought for, and the wind 
Charged with rich words poured out in thought's 
i defence ; 
Whether the Church inspire that eloquence, 
' Or a Platonic Piety confined 
To the sole temple of the inward mind ; 
And One there is who builds immortal lays, 
Though doomed to tread in solitary ways, 
Darkness before and danger's voice behind ; 
i Yet not alone, nor helpless to repel 
! Sad thoughts ; for from above the starry sphere 
; Come secrets, whispered nightly to his ear ; 
And the pure spirit of celestial light 
Shines through his soul — 'that he may see and tell 
■ Of things invisible to mortal sight.' 

walton's book of lives. 
There are no colours in the fairest sky 
So fair as these. The feather, whence the pen 
Was shaped that traced the lives of these good men, 
Dropped from an Angel's wing. With moistened eye 
We read of faith and purest charity 
In Statesman, Priest, and humble Citizen : 
O could we copy their mild virtues, then 
What joy to live, what blessedness to die ! 
Methinks their very names shine still and bright : 
Apart — like glow-worms on a summer night ; 
Or lonely tapers when from far they fling 
A guiding ray ; or seen — like stars on high, 
Satellites burning in a lucid ring 
Around meek Walton's heavenly memory. 

CLERICAL INTEGRITY. 
Nor shall the eternal roll of praise reject 
Those Unconforming ; whom one rigorous day 
Drives from their Cures, a voluntary prey 
To poverty, and grief, and disrespect, 
And some to want — as if by tempests wrecked 
On a wild coast ; how destitute ! did They 
Feel not that Conscience never can betray, 
That peace of mind is Virtue's sure effect. 
Their altars they forego, their homes they quit, 
Fields which they love, and paths they daily trod, 
And cast the future upon Providence ; 
As men the dictate of whose inward sense 
Outweighs the world ; whom self-deceiving wit 
Lures not from what they deem the cause of God. 

PERSECUTION OF THE SCOTTISH COVENANTERS. 
When Alpine Vales threw forth a suppliant cry, 
The majesty of England interposed [closed ; 
And the sword stopped ; the bleeding wounds were 
And Faith preserved her ancient purity. 
How little boots that precedent of goodj 
Scorned or forgotten, Thou canst testify, 
For England's shame, Sister Realm ! from wood, 
Mountain, and moor, and crowded street, where lie 
The headless martyrs of the Covenant, 
Slain by Compatriot-protestants that draw 
From councils senseless as intolerant 
Their warrant. Bodies fall by wild sword-law ; 
But who would force the Soul, tilts with a straw 
Against a Champion cased in adamant. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

ACQUITTAL OF THE BISHOPS. 
A voice, from long-expecting thousands sent, 
Shatters the air, and troubles tower and spire ; 
For Justice hath absolved the innocent, 
And Tyranny is balked of her desire : 
Up, down, the busy Thames — rapid as fire 
Coursing a train of gunpowder — it went, 
And transport finds in every street a vent, 
Till the whole City rings like one vast quire. 
The Fathers urge the People to be still, [vain ! 
With outstretched hands and earnest speech — in 
Yea, many, haply wont to entertain 
Small reverence for the mitre's offices, 
And to Religion's self no friendly will, 
A Prelate's blessing ask on bended knees. 

WILLIAM THE THIRD. 
Calm as an under- current, strong to draw 
Millions of waves into itself, and run, 
From sea to sea, impervious to the sun 
And ploughing storm, the spirit of Nassau 
Swerves not, (how blest if by religious awe 
Swayed, and thereby enabled to contend 
With the wide world's commotions) from its end 
Swerves not — diverted by a casual law. 
Had mortal action e'er a nobler scope? 
The Hero comes to liberate, not defy ; 
And, while he marches on with stedfast hope, 
Conqueror beloved ! expected anxiously ! 
The vacillating Bondman of the Pope 
Shrinks from the verdict of his stedfast eye. 

OBLIGATIONS OF CIVIL TO RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 
Ungrateful Country, if thou e'er forget 
The sons who for thy civil rights have bled ! 
How, like a Roman, Sidney bowed his head, 
And RussePs milder blood the scaffold wet ; 
But these had fallen for profitless regret 
Had not thy holy Church her champions bred, 
And claims from other worlds inspirited 
The star of Liberty to rise. Nor yet 
(Grave this within thy heart !) if spiritual things 
Be lost, through apathy, or scorn, or fear, 
Shalt thou thy humbler franchises support, 
However hardly won or justly dear : 
What came from heaven to heaven by nature clings, 
And, if dissevered thence, its course is short. 

sacheverel. 
A sudden conflict rises from the swell 
Of a proud slavery met by tenets strained 
In Liberty's behalf. Fears, true or feigned, 
Spread through all ranks ; and lo ! the Sentiuel 
Who loudest rang his pulpit 'larum bell, 
Stands at the Bar, absolved by female eyes 
Mingling their glances with grave flatteries 
Lavished on Him — that England may rebel 
Against her ancient virtue. High and Low, 
Watch- words of Party, on all tongues are rife ; 
As if a Church, though sprung from heaven, must 
To opposites and fierce extremes her life, — [owe 
Not to the golden mean, and quiet flow 
Of truths that soften hatred, temper strife 

Down a swift Stream, thus far, a bold design 
Have we pursued, with livelier stir of heart 
Than his who sees, borne forward by the Rhine, 
The living landscapes greet him, and depart ; 
Sees spires fast sinking— up again to start ! 
And strives the towers to number, that recline 
O'er the dark steeps, or on the horizon line 
Striding with shattered crests his eye athwart. 
So have we hurried on with troubled pleasure : 
Henceforth, as on the bosom of a stream 
That slackens, and spreads wide a watery gleam, 
We, nothing loth a lingering course to measure, 
May gather up our thoughts, and mark at leisure 
How widely spread the interests of our theme. 

ASPECTS OF CHRISTIANITY IN AMERICA. 
I. THE PILGRIM FATHERS. 
Well worthy to be magnified are they 
Who, with sad hearts, of friends and country took 
A last farewell, their loved abodes forsook, 
And hallowed ground in which their fathers lay ; 
Then to the new-found World explored their way, 
That so a Church, unforced, uncalled to brook 
Ritual restraints, within some sheltering nook 
Her Lord might worship and his word obey 
In freedom. Men they were who could not bend ; 
Blest Pilgrims, surely, as they took for guide 
A will by sovereign Conscience sanctified ; 
Blest while their Spirits from the woods ascend 
Along a Galaxy that knows no end, 
But in His glory who for Sinners died. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

II. CONTINUED. 
'rom Rite and Ordinance abused they fled 
o Wilds where both were utterly unknown ; 
ut not to them had Providence foreshown 
hat benefits are missed, what evils bred, 
worship neither raised nor limited 
.Save by Self-will. Lo ! from that distant shore, 
'or Rite and Ordinance, Piety is led 
Sack to the Land those Pilgrims left of yore, 
«d by her own free choice. So Truth and Love 
y Conscience governed do their steps retrace. — 
'athers ! your Virtues, such the power of grace, 
'heir spirit, in your Children, thus approve, 
'ranscendent over time, unbound by place, 
loncord and Charity in circles move. 

III. CONCLUDED. AMERICAN EPISCOPACY. 
Patriots informed with Apostolic light 
Vere they, who, when their Country had been freed, 
Sowing with reverence to the ancient creed, 
'ixed on the frame of England's Church their eight, 
md strove in filial love to reunite 
Vhat force had severed. Thence they fetched the 
seed 
>f Christian unity, and won a meed 
tf praise from Heaven. To Thee, saintly White, 
'atriarch of a wide-spreading family, 
temotest lands and unborn times shall turn, 
Whether they would restore or build — to Thee, 
s one who rightly taught how zeal should burn, 
is one who drew from out Faith's holiest urn 
.'he purest stream of patient Energy. 

ishops and Priests, blessed are ye, if deep 
As yours above all offices is high) 
)eep in your hearts the sense of duty lie ; 
,'harged as ye are by Christ to feed and keep 
rom wolves your portion of his chosen sheep : 
labouring as ever in your Master's sight, 
laking your hardest task your best delight, 
Vhat perfect glory ye in Heaven shall reap ! — 
jiut, in the solemn Office which ye sought 
jlnd undertook premonished, if unsound 
ifour practice prove, faithless though but in thought, 
ishops and Priests, think what a gulf profound 
A waits you then, if they were rightly taught 
jVho framed the Ordinance by your lives disowned ! 

PLACES OF WORSHIP. 
As star that shines dependent upon star 
Is to the sky while we look up in love ; 
As to the deep fair ships which though they move 
Seem fixed, to eyes that watch them from afar ; 
As to the sandy desert fountains are, 
With palm-groves shaded at wide intervals, 
Whose fruit around the sun-burnt Native falls 
Of roving tired or desultory war — 
Such to this British Isle her christian Fanes, 
Each linked to each for kindred services ; 
Her Spires, her Steeple-towers with glittering vanes 
Far-kenned, her Chapels lurking among trees, 
Where a few villagers on bended knees 
Find solace which a busy world disdains. 

PASTORAL CHARACTER. 
A genial hearth, a hospitable board, 
And a refined rusticity, belong 
To the neat mansion, where, his flock among, 
The learned Pastor dwells, their watchful Lord. 
Though meek and patient as a sheathed sword; 
Though pride's least lurking thought appear a 
wrong 
To human kind ; though peace be on his tongue, 
Gentleness in his heart — can earth afford 
Such genuine state, pre-eminence so free, 
As when, arrayed in Christ's authority, 
He from the pulpit lifts his awful hand ; 
Conjures, implores, and labours all he can 
For re-subjecting to divine command 
The stubborn spirit of rebellious man ? 

THE LITURGY. 
Yes, if the intensities of hope and fear 
Attract us still, and passionate exercise 
Of lofty thoughts, the way before us lies 
Distinct with signs, through which in set career, 
As through a zodiac, moves the ritual year 
Of England's Church ; stupendous mysteries ! 
Which whoso travels in her bosom eyes, 
As he approaches them, with solemn cheer. 
Upon that circle traced from sacred story 
We only dare to cast a transient glance, 
Trusting in hope that Others may advance 
With mind intent upon the King of Glory, 
From his mild advent till his countenance 
Shall dissipate the seas and mountains hoary. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Dear be the Church, that, watching o'er the needs 
Of Infancy, provides a timely shower 
Whose virtue changes to a christian Flower 
A Growth from sinful Nature's bed of weeds ! — 
Fitliest beneath the sacred roof proceeds 
The ministration ; while parental Love 
Looks on, and Grace descendeth from above 
As the high service pledges now, now pleads. 
There, should vain thoughts outspread their wings 
To meet the coming hours of festal mirth, [and fly 
The tombs— which hear and answer that brief cry, 
The Infant's notice of his second birth — 
Recal the wandering Soul to sympathy 
With what man hopes from Heaven, yet fears from 
Earth. 

Father ! to God himself we cannot give 
A holier name ! then lightly do not bear 
Both names conjoined, but of thy spiritual care 
Be duly mindful : still more sensitive 
Do Thou, in truth a second Mother, strive 
Against disheartening custom, that by Thee 
Watched, and with love and pious industry 
Tended at need, the adopted Plant may thrive 
For everlasting bloom. Benign and pure 
This Ordinance, whether loss it would supply, 
Prevent omission, help deficiency, 
Or seek to make assurance doubly sure. 
Shame if the consecrated Vow be found 
An idle form, the Word an empty sound ! 

CATECHISING. 
From Little down to Least, in due degree, 
Around the Pastor, each in new- wrought vest, 
Each with a vernal posy at his breast, 
We stood, a trembling, earnest Company ! 
With low soft murmur, like a distant bee, 
Some spake, by thought-perplexing fears betrayed ; 
And some a bold unerring answer made : 
How fluttered then thy anxious heart for me, 
Beloved Mother ! Thou whose happy hand 
Had bound the flowers I wore, with faithful tie : 
Sweet flowers ! at whose inaudible command 
Her countenance, phantom-like, doth re-appear : 
lost too early for the frequent tear, 
And ill requited by this heartfelt sigh ! 

XXIII. 
CONFIRMATION. 

The Young-ones gathered in from hill and dale, 
With holiday delight on every brow : 
'Tis passed away ; far other thoughts prevail ; 
For they are taking the baptismal Vow 
Upon their conscious selves ; then own lips spec 
The solemn promise. Strongest sinews fail, 
And many a blooming, many a lovely, cheek 
Under the holy fear of God turns pale ; 
While on each head his lawn-robed Servant lays 
An apostolic hand, and with prayer seals 
The Covenant. The Omnipotent will raise 
Their feeble Souls ; and bear with Ms regrets, 
Who, looking round the fair assemblage, feels 
That ere the Sun goes down their childhood seu 

CONFIRMATION CONTINUED. 
I saw a Mother's eye intensely bent 
Upon a Maiden trembling as she knelt ; 
In and for whom the pious Mother felt 
Things that we judge of by a light too faiut: 
Tell, if ye may, some star-crowned Muse, or Itiu 
Tell what rushed in, from what she was relieved 
Then, when her Child the hallowing touch reeeivi 
And such vibration through the Mother went 
That tears burst forth amain. Did gleams appea 
Opened a vision of that blissful place 
Where dwells a Sister-child \ And was power giv 
Part of her lost One's glory back to trace 
Even to this Rite ? For thus She knelt, and, or 
The summer-leaf had faded, passed to Heaven 

SACRAMENT. 
By chain yet stronger must the Soul be tied : 
One duty more, last stage of this ascent, 
Brings to thy food, mysterious Sacrament ! 
The Offspring, haply at the Parent's side ; 
But not till They, with all that do abide 
In Heaven, have lifted up their hearts to laud 
And magnify the glorious name of God, 
Fountain of grace, whose Son for sinners died. 
Ye, who have duly weighed the summons, {BUS 
No longer ; ye, whom to the saving rite 
The Altar calls ; come early under laws 
That can secure for you a path of fight 
Through gloomiest shade j put on (nor dread 
weight) 
Armour divine, and conquer in your cause ! 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

THE MARRIAGE CEREMONY. 
he Vested Priest before the Altar stands ; 
pproach, come gladly, ye prepared, in sight 
,f God and chosen friends, your troth to plight 
'ith the symbolic ring, and willing hands 
>lenmly joined. Now sanctify the bands 
Father ! — to the Espoused thy blessing give, 
!hat mutually assisted they may live 
bedient, as here taught, to thy commands. 
) prays the Church, to consecrate a Vow 
The which would endless matrimony make ; " 
nion that shadows forth and doth partake 
mystery potent human love to endow [sake ; 
ith heavenly, each more prized for the other's 
T eep not, meek Bride ! uplift thy timid brow. 

! THANKSGIVING AFTER CHILDBIRTH, 
f oman ! the Power who left his throne on high, 
nd deigned to wear the robe of flesh we wear, 
lie Power that thro' the straits of Infancy 
iid pass dependant on maternal care, 
is own humanity with Thee will share, 
leased with the thanks that in his People's eye 
hou offerest up for safe Delivery 
rom Childbirth's perilous throes. And should 
the Heir 
f thy fond hopes hereafter walk inclined 
o courses fit to make a mother rue 
hat ever he was born, a glance of mind 
ast upon this observance may renew 
better will ; and, in the imagined view 
if thee thus kneeling, safety he may find. 

VISITATION OF THE SICK. 
he Sabbath bells renew the inviting peal ; 
/lad music ! yet there be that, worn with pain 
■ nd sickness, listen where they long have lain, 
b sadness listen. With maternal zeal 
aspired, the Church sends ministers to kneel 
'■eside the afflicted ; to sustain with prayer, 
•nd soothe the heart confession hath laid bare— 
'hat pardon, from God's throne, may set its seal 
>n a true Penitent. When breath departs 
iVom one disburthened so, so comforted, 
jlis Spirit Angels greet ; and ours be hope 
hat, if the Sufferer rise from his sick-bed, 
lence he will gain a firmer mind, to cope 
Vith a bad world, and foil the Tempter's arte. 

THE COMMINATION SERVICE. 
Shun not this Rite, neglected, yea abhorred, 
By some of unreflecting mind, as calling 
Man to curse man, (thought monstrous and 
appalling.) 
Go thou and hear the threatenings of the Lord; 
Listening within his Temple see his sword 
Unsheathed in wrath to strike the offender's head, 
Thy own, if sorrow for thy sin be dead, 
Guilt unrepented, pardon unimplored. 
Two aspects bears Truth needful for salvation ; 
Who knows not that  ? — yet would this delicate age 
Look only on the Gospel's brighter page : 
Let light and dark duly our thoughts employ ; 
So shall the fearful words of Commination 
Yield timely fruit of peace and love and joy. 

FORMS OF PRATER AT SEA. 
To kneeling Worshippers no earthly floor 
Gives holier invitation than the deck 
Of a storm-shattered Vessel saved from Wreck 
(When all that Man could do avail'd no more) 
By him who raised the Tempest and restrains : 
Happy the crew who this have felt, and pour 
Forth for his mercy, as the Church ordains, 
Solemn thanksgiving. Nor will they implore 
In vain who, for a rightful cause, give breath 
To words the Church prescribes aiding the lip 
For the heart's sake, ere ship with hostile ship 
Encounters, armed for work of pain and death. 
Suppliants ! the God to whom your cause ye trust 
Will listen, and ye know that He is just. 

FUNERAL SERVICE. 
From the Baptismal hour, thro' weal and woe, 
The Church extends her care to thought and deed; 
Nor quits the Body when the Soul is freed, 
The mortal weight cast off to be laid low. 
Blest Rite for him who hears in faith, " I know 
That my Redeemer liveth," — hears each word 
That follows — striking on some kindred chord 
Deep in the thankful heart ; — yet tears will flow. 
Man is as grass that springeth up at morn, 
Grows green, and is cut down and withereth 
Ere nightfall — truth that well may claim a sigh, 
Its natural echo ; but hope comes reborn 
At Jesu's bidding. We rejoice, " Death 
Where is thy Sting ? — Grave where is thy Vic- 
tory ? " 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

RURAL CEREMONY. 
Closing the sacred Book which long has fed 
Our meditations, give we to a day 
Of annual joy one tributary lay ; 
This day, when, forth by rustic music led, 
The village Children, while the sky is red 
With evening lights, advance in long array [gay, 
Through the still church-yard, each with garland 
That, carried sceptre-like, o'ertops the head 
Of the proud Bearer. To the wide church-door, 
Charged with these offerings which their fathers bore 
For decoration in the Papal time, 
The innocent Procession softly moves : — 
The spirit of Laud is pleased in heaven's pure clime, 
And Hooker's voice the spectacle approves ! 
XXXIII. 
REGRETS. 
Would that our scrupulous Sires had dared to leave 
Less scanty measure of those graceful rites 
And usages, whose due return invites 
A stir of mind too natural to deceive ; 
Giving to Memory help when she would weave 
A crown for Hope !— I dread the boasted lights 
That all too often are but fiery blights, 
Killing the bud o'er which in vain we grieve. 
Go, seek, when Christmas snows discomfort bring, 
The counter Spirit found in some gay church 
Green with fresh holly, every pew a perch 
In which the linnet or the thrush might sing, 
Merry and loud and safe from prying search, 
Strains offered only to the genial Spiing. 

MUTABILITY. 
From low to high doth dissolution climb, 
And sink from high to low, along a scale 
Of awful notes, whose concord shall not fail ; 
A musical but melancholy chime, 
Which they can hear who meddle not with crime, 
Nor avarice, nor over-anxious care. 
Truth fails not ; but her outward forms that bear 
The longest date do melt like frosty rime, 
That in the, morning whitened hill and plain 
And is no more ; drop like the tower sublime 
Of yesterday, which royally did wear 
His crown of weeds, but could not even sustain 
Some casual shout that broke the silent air, 
Or the unimaginable touch of Time. 

OLD ABBEYS. 
Monastic Domes ! following my downward way, 
Untouched by due regret I marked your fall ! 
Now, ruin, beauty, ancient stillness, all 
Dispose to judgments temperate as we lay 
On our past selves in life's declining day : 
For as, by discipline of Time made wise, 
We learn to tolerate the infirmities 
And faults of others — gently as he may, 
So with our own the mild Instructor deals, 
Teaching us to forget them or forgive. 
Perversely curious, then, for hidden ill 
Why should we break Time's charitable seals ? 
Once ye were holy, ye are holy still ; 
Your spirit freely let me drink, and live ! 

EMIGRANT FRENCH CLERGY. 
Even while I speak, the sacred roofs of France 
Are shattered into dust ; and self-exiled 
From altars threatened, levelled, or defiled, 
Wander the Ministers of God, as chance 
Opens a way for life, or consonance 
Of faith invites. More welcome to no land 
The fugitives than to the British strand, 
Where priest and layman with the vigilance 
Of true compassion greet them. Creed and test 
Vanish before the unreserved embrace 
Of catholic humanity : — distrest 
They came, — and, while the moral tempest roars 
Throughout the Country they have left, our shor. 
Give to their Faith a fearless resting-place. 

CONGRATULATION. 
Thus all things lead to Charity, secured 
By them who blessed the soft and happy gale 
That landward urged the great Deliverer's sai!, 
Till in the sunny bay his fleet was moored ! 
Propitious hour ! had we, like them, endured 
Sore stress of apprehension , with a mind 
Sickened by injuries, dreading worse designed, 
From month to month trembling and unassured, 
How had we then rejoiced ! But we have felt, 
As a loved substance, their futurity : 
Good, which they dared not hope for, we have seer 
A State whose generous will through earth is dealt 
A State — which, balancing herself between 
Licence and slavish order, dares be free. 

ECCLESIASTICAL SONNETS. 

 

NEW CHURCHES. 
t liberty, and triumphs on the Main, 
d laurelled armies, not to be withstood — 
hat serve they ? if, on transitory good 
tent, and sedulous of abject gain, 
e State (ah, surely not preserved in vain !) 
rbeav to shape due channels which the Flood 
sacred truth may enter — till it brood 
sr the wide realm, as o'er the Egyptian plain 
e all-sustaining Nile. No more — the time 
conscious of her want; through England's 
bounds, 
I rival haste, the wished-for Temples rise ! 
iiear their sabbath bells' harmonious chime 
,oat on the breeze — the heavenliest of all sounds 
iat vale or hill prolongs or multiplies ! 
xxxix. 
CHURCH TO BE ERECTED. 
p this the chosen site ; the virgin sod, 
listened from age to age by dewy eve, 
all disappear, and grateful earth receive 
le corner-stone from hands that build to God. 
m reverend hawthorns, hardened to the rod 
I winter storms, yet budding cheerfully ; 
iiose forest oaks of Druid memory, 
iiall long survive, to shelter the Abode 
t genuine Faith. Where, haply, 'mid this band 
I daisies, shepherds sate of yore and wove 
(ay-garlands, there let the holy altar stand 
pr kneeling adoration ; — while — above, 
roods, visibly portrayed, the mystic Dove, 
iat shall protect from blasphemy the Land. 

CONTINUED. 
Iine ear has rung, my spirit sunk subdued, 
aaring the strong emotion of the crowd, 
l^hen each pale brow to dread hosannas bowed 
liile clouds of incense mounting veiled the rood, 
hat glimmered like a pine-tree dimly viewed 
hrough Alpine vapours. Such appalling rite 
'.ur Church prepares not, trusting to the might 
f simple truth with grace divine imbued ; 
jet will we not conceal the precious Cross, 
ike men ashamed : the Sun with his first smile 
shall greet that symbol crowning the low Pile : 
nd the fresh air of incense-breathing morn 
hall wooingly embrace it ; and green moss 
jreep round its arms through centuries unborn. 

xli. 
new church-yard. 
The encircling ground, iu native turf arrayed, 
Is now by solemn consecration given 
To social interests, and to favouring Heaven, 
And where the rugged colts their gambols played, 
And wild deer bounded through the forest glade, 
Unchecked as when by merry Outlaw driven, 
Shall hymns of praise resound at morn and even ; 
And soon, full soon, the lonely Sexton's spade 
Shall wound the tender sod. Encincture small, 
But infinite its grasp of weal and woe ! 
Hopes, fears, in never-ending ebb and flow ; — 
The spousal trembling, and the 'dust to dust,' 
The prayers, the contrite struggle, and the trust 
That to the Almighty Father looks through all. 

CATHEDRALS, ETC. 
Open your gates, ye everlasting Piles ! 
Types of the spiritual Church which God hath reared ; 
Not loth we quit the newly-hallowed sward 
And humble altar, 'mid your sumptuous aisles 
To kneel, or thrid your intricate defiles, 
Or down the nave to pace in motion slow ; 
Watching, with upward eye, the tall tower grow 
And mount, at every step, with living wiles 
Instinct — to rouse the heart and lead the will 
By a bright ladder to the world above. 
Open your gates, ye Monuments of love 
Divine ! thou Lincoln, on thy sovereign hill ! 
Thou, stately York ! and Ye, whose splendours cheer 
Isis and Cam, to patient Science dear ! 

INSIDE OF KING S COLLEGE CHAPEL, CAMBRIDGE. 
Tax not the royal Saint with vain expense, 
With ill-matched aims the Architect who planned — 
Albeit labouring for a scanty band 
Of white robed Scholars only — this immense 
And glorious Work of fine intelligence ! 
Give all thou canst ; high Heaven rejects the lore 
Of nicely-calculated less or more ; 
So deemed the man who fashioned for the sense 
These lofty pillars, spread that branching roof 
Self-poised, and scooped into ten thousand cells, 
Where light and shade repose, where music dwells 
Lingering — and wandering on as loth to die ; 
Like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth proof 
That they were born for immortality. 

S 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE SAME. 
What awful perspective ! while from our sight 
With gradual stealth the lateral windows hide 
Their Portraitures, their stone-work glimmers, 
dyed 
In the soft chequerings of a sleepy light. 
Martyr, or King, or sainted Eremite, 
Whoe'er ye be, that thus, yourselves unseen, 
Imbue your prison-bars with solemn sheen, 
Shine on, until ye fade with coming Night ! — ■ 
But, from the arms of silence — list ! list ! 
The music bursteth into second life ; 
The notes luxuriate, every stone is Idssed 
By sound, or ghost of sound, in mazy strife ; 
Heart -thrilling strains, that cast, before the eye 
Of the devout, a veil of ecstasy ! 

CONTINUED. 
They dreamt not of a perishable home 
Who thus could build. Be mine, in hours of fear 
Or grovelling thought, to seek a refuge here ; 
Or through the aisles of Westminster to roam ; 
Where bubbles burst, and folly's dancing foam 
Melts, if it cross the threshold ; where the wreath 
Of awe-struck wisdom droops : or let my path 
Lead to that younger Pile, whose sky-like dome 
Hath typified by reach of daring art 
Infinity's embrace ; whose guardian crest, 
The silent Cross, among the stars shall spread 
As now, when She hath also seen her breast 
Filled with mementos, satiate with its part 
Of grateful England's overflowing Dead. 

ejaculation. 
Glory to God ! and to the Power who came 
In filial duty, clothed with love divine, 
That made his human tabernacle shine 
Like Ocean burning with purpureal flame ; 
Or like the Alpine Mount, that takes its name 
From roseate hues, far kenned at mom and even 
In hours of peace, or when the storm is driven 
Along the nether region's rugged frame ! 
Earth prompts — Heaven urges ; let us seek :i 
light, 
Studious of that pure intercourse begun 
When first our infant brows their lustre won ; 
So, like the Mountain, may we grow more bright 
From unimpeded commerce with the Sun, 
At the approach of all -involving night. 

CONCLUSION. 
Why sleeps the future, as a snake enrolled. 
Coil within coil, at noon-tide ? For the Wori> 
Yields, if with unpresumptuous faith explore'. 
Power at whose touch the sluggard shall unfold 
His drowsy rings. Look forth ! — that Strea 
behold, 
That Stream upon whose bosom we have passe 
Floating at ease while nations have effaced 
Nations, and Death has gathered to his fold 
Long lines of mighty Kings — look forth, my Sou 
(Nor in this vision be thou slow to trust) 
The living Waters, less and less by guilt 
Stained and polluted, brighten as they roll, 
Till they have reached the eternal City — b'liit 
For the perfe'eted Spirits of the just ! 

YARROW REVISITED. 


 

YARROW REVISITED, AND OTHER POEMS, 
IPOSED (TWO EXCEPTED) DURING A TOUR IN SCOTLAND, AND ON THE ENGLISH BORDER, 
IN THE AUTUMN OF . 

SAMUEL ROGERS, ESQ., 
A A TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF INTELLECTUAL OBLIGATIONS 
THESE MEMORIALS ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED. 
Rydal Mount, Dec. , . 

[ie following Stanzas are a memorial of a day passed 
ith Sir Walter Scott, and other Friends visiting the 
anks of the Yarrow under his guidance, immediately 
iSfore his departure from Abbotsford, for Naples. 
The title Yarrow Revisited will stand in no need of 
iplanation, for Readers acquainted with the Author's 
revious poems suggested by that celebrated Stream.] 
'. e gallant Youth, who may have gained, 
)r seeks, a ' winsome Marrow,' 
 is but an Infant in the lap 
:iVhen first I looked on Yarrow ; 
<!ce more, by Newark's Castle-gate 
lLong left without a warder, 
] tood, looked, listened, and with Thee, 
jreat Minstrel of the Border ! 
( ave thoughts ruled wide on that sweet day, 
jrheir dignity installing 
I gentle bosoms, while sere leaves 
Were on the bough, or falling ; 
I I breezes played, and sunshine gleamed — 
The forest to embolden ; 
ddened the fiery hues, and shot 
'ransparence through the golden. 
r busy thoughts the Stream flowed on 
Cn foamy agitation ; 
id slept in many a crystal pool 
!For quiet contemplation : 
I  public and no private care 
The freeborn mind enthralling, 
made a day of happy hours, 
Our happy days recalling. 

Brisk Youth appeared, the Morn of youth, 
With freaks of graceful folly, — 
Life's temperate Noon, her sober Eve, 
Her Night not melancholy ; 
Past, present, future, all appeared 
In harmony united, 
Like guests that meet, and some from far, 
By cordial love invited. 
And if, as Yarrow, through the woods 
And down the meadow ranging, 
Did meet us with unaltered face, 
Though we were changed and changing ; 
If, then, some natural shadows spread 
Our inward prospect over, 
The soul's deep valley was not slow 
Its brightness to recover. 
Eternal blessings on the Muse, 
And her divine employment ! 
The blameless Muse, who trains her Sons 
For hope and calm enjoyment ; 
Albeit sickness, lingering yet, 
Has o'er their pillow brooded ; 
And Care waylays their steps — a Sprite 
Not easily eluded. 
For thee, Scott ! compelled to change 
Green Eildon-hill and Cheviot 
For warm Vesuvio's vine-clad slopes ; 
And leave thy Tweed and Tiviot 
For mild Sorento's breezy waves ; 
May classic Fancy, linking 
With native Fancy her fresh aid, 
Preserve thy heart from sinking ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

! while they minister to thee, 
Each vying with the other, 
May Health return to mellow Age 
With Strength, her venturous brother ; 
And Tiber, and each brook and rill 
Renowned in song and story, 
With unimagined beauty shine, 
Nor lose one ray of glory ! 
For Thou, upon a hundred streams, 
By tales of love and sorrow, 
Of faithful love, undaunted truth, 
Hast shed the power of Yarrow ; 
And streams unknown, hills yet unseen, 
Wherever they invite Thee, 
At parent Nature's grateful call, 
With gladness must requite Thee. 
A gracious welcome shall be thine, 
Such looks of love and honour 
As thy own Yarrow gave to me 
When first I gazed upon her ; 
Beheld what I had feared to see, 
Unwilling to surrender 
Dreams treasured up from early days, 
The holy and the tender. 
And what, for this frail world, were all 
That mortals do or suffer, 
Did no responsive harp, no pen, 
Memorial tribute offer ? 
Yea, what were mighty Nature's self? 
Her features, could they win us, 
Unhelped by the poetic voice 
That hourly speaks within us ? 
Nor deem that localised Romance 
Plays false with our affections ; 
Unsanctifies our tears — made sport 
For fanciful dejections : 
Ah, no ! the visions of the past 
Sustain the heart in feeling 
Life as she is — our changeful Life, 
With friends and kindred dealing. 
Bear witness, Ye, whose thoughts that day 
In Yarrow's groves were centred ; 
Who through the silent portal arch 
Of mouldering Newark enter'd ; 
And clomb the winding stair that once 
Too timidly was mounted 
By the ' last Minstrel,' (not the last !) 
Ere he his Tale recounted. 

Flow on for ever, Yarrow Stream ! 
Fulfil thy pensive duty, 
Well pleased that future Bards should chant 
For simple hearts thy beauty ; 
To dream-light dear while yet unseen, 
Dear to the common sunshine, 
And dearer still, as now I feel, 
To memory's shadowy moonshine ! 

ON THE DEPARTURE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT FRO 
ABBOTSFORD, FOR NAPLES. 
A trouble, not of clouds, or weeping rain, 
Nor of the setting sun's pathetic light 
Engendered, hangs o'er Eildon's triple height : 
Spirits of Power, assembled there, complain 
For kindred Power departing from their sight ; 
While Tweed, best pleased in chanting a blitb 
strain, 
Saddens his voice again, and yet again. 
Lift up your hearts, ye Mourners ! for the might 
Of the whole world's good wishes with him gi 
Blessings and prayers in nobler retinue 
Than sceptred king or laurelled conqueror know 
Follow this wondrous Potentate. Be true, 
Ye winds of ocean, and the midland sea, 
Wafting your Charge to soft Parthenope ! 

A PLACE OF BURIAL IN THE SOUTH OF SCOTLAN 
Part fenced by man, part by a rugged steep 
That curbs a foaming brook, a Grave-yard lies ; 
The hare's best couching-place for fearless sleep 
Which moonlit elves, far seen by credulous eyes 
Enter in dance. Of church, or sabbath ties, 
No vestige now remains ; yet thither creep 
Bereft Ones, and in lowly anguish weep 
Their prayers out to the wind and naked skies, 
Proud tomb is none; but rudely-sculptured knight 
By humble choice of plain old times, are seen 
Level with earth, among the hillocks green : 
Union not sad, when sunny daybreak smites 
The spangled turf, and neighbouring thickets ru 
With jubilate from the choirs of spring! 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND, . 

 

(ON THE SIGHT OF A MANSE IN THE SOUTH OF 
SCOTLAND. 
Say, ye far-travelled clouds, far-seeing hills — 
Among the happiest-looking homes of men 
Scatter'd all Britain over, through deep glen, 
On airy upland, and by forest rills, 
And o'er wide plains cheered by the lark that trills 
,His sky-born warblings — does aught meet your ken 
More fit to animate the Poet's pen, 
Aught that more surely by its aspect fills 
Pure minds with sinless envy, than the Abode 
Of the good Priest : who, faithful through all hours 
To his high charge, and truly serving God, 
Has yet a heart and hand for trees and flowers, 
Enjoys the walks his predecessors trod, 
Nor covets lineal rights in lands and towers. 

COMPOSED IN ROSLIN CHAPEL, DURING A STORM. 
The wind is now thy organist ; — a clank 
'We know not whence) ministers for a bell 
To mark some change of service. As the swell 
Df music reached its height, and even when sank 
The notes, in prelude, Roslin ! to a blank 
Df silence, how it thrilled thy sumptuous roof, 
Pillars, and arches, — not in vain time-proof, 
Though Christian rites be wanting ! From what bank 
Same those live herbs  by what hand were they 
sown [unknown ? 
•rtTiere dew falls not, where rain-drops seem 
Yet in the Temple they a friendly niche [grown, 
ihare with their sculptured fellows, that, green- 
>opy their beauty more and more, and preach, 
Chough mute, of all things blending into one. 

THE TROSACHS. 
here's not a nook within this solemn Pass, 
'ut were an apt confessional for One 
taught by his summer spent, his autumn gone, 
'hat Life is but a tale of morning grass 
Vitkered at eve. From scenes of art which chase 
fhat thought away, turn, and with watchful eyes 
Feed it 'mid Nature's old felicities, 
locks, rivers, and smooth lakes more clear than glass 
Jntouched, unbreathed upon. Thrice happy quest, 
if from a golden perch of aspen spray 
jOctober's workmanship. to rival May) 
l'he pensive warbler of the ruddy breast 
i'hat moral sweeten by a heaven-taught lay, 
.'filing the year, with all its cares, to rest ! 

The pibroch's note, discountenanced or mute ; 
The Roman kilt, degraded to a toy 
Of quaint apparel for a half-spoilt boy ; 
The target mouldering like ungathered fruit ; 
The smoking steam-boat eager in pursuit, 
As eagerly pursued ; the umbrella spread 
To weather-fend the Celtic herdsman's head — 
All speak of manners withering to the root, 
And of old honours, too, and passions high : 
Then may we ask, though pleased that thought 
Among the conquests of civility, [should range 
Survives imagination — to the change 
Superior ? Help to virtue does she give ? 
If not, Mortals, better cease to live ! 

COMPOSED IN THE GLEN OF LOCH ETIVE. 
"This Land of Rainbows spanning glens whose 
walls, 
Rock-built, are hung with rainbow-coloured mists — 
Of far-stretched Meres whose salt flood never 
rests — ■ 
Of tuneful Caves and playful Waterfalls — 
Of Mountains varying momently their crests — 
Proud be this Land ! whose poorest huts are halls 
Where Fancy entertains becoming guests ; 
While native song the heroic Past recals." 
Thus, in the net of her own wishes caught, 
The Muse exclaimed ; but Story now must hide 
Her trophies, Fancy crouch ; the course of pride 
Has been diverted, other lessons taught, 
That make the Patriot-spirit bow her head 
Where the all-conquering Roman feared to tread. 
IX. 
EAGLES. 
COMPOSED AT DUNOLHE CASTLE IN THE BAT OF OBAN. 
Dishonoured Rock and Ruin ! that, by law 
Tyrannic, keep the Bird of Jove embarred 
Like a lone criminal whos? life is spared. 
Vexed is he, and screams loud. The last I saw 
Was on the wing ; stooping, he struck with awe 
Man, bird, and beast ; then, with a consort paired, 
From a bold headland, their loved aery's guard, 
Flew high above Atlantic waves, to draw 
Light from the fountain of the setting sun. 
Such was this Prisoner once ; and, when his plumes 
The sea-blast ruffles as the storm comes on, 
Then, for a moment, he, in spirit, resumes 
His rank 'mong freeborn creatures that live free, 
His power, his beauty, and his majesty. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

IN THE SOUND OF MULL. 
Tradition, be thou mute ! Oblivion, throw 
Thy veil in mercy o'er the records, hung 
Round strath and mountain, stamped by the ancient 
On rock and ruin darkening as we go, — [tongue 
Spots where a word, ghost-like, survives to show 
What crimes from hate, or desperate love, have 
sprung ; 
From honour misconceived, or fancied wrong, 
What feuds, not quenched but fed by mutual woe. 
Yet, though a wild vindictive Race, untamed 
By civil arts and labours of the pen, 
Could gentleness be scorned by those fierce Men, 
Who, to spread wide the reverence they claimed 
For patriarchal occupations, named 
Yon towering Peaks, ' Shepherds of Etive Glen  ' 

SUGGESTED AT TYNDRUM IN A STORM. 
Enough of garlands, of the Arcadian crook, 
And all that Greece and Italy have sung 
Of Swains reposing myrtle groves among ! 
Ours couch on naked rocks, — will cross a brook 
Swoln with chill rains, nor ever cast a look 
This way or that, or give it even a thought 
More than by smoothest pathway may be brought 
Into a vacant mind. Can written book 
Teach what they learn ? Up, hardy Mountaineer ! 
And guide the Bard, ambitious to be One 
Of Nature's privy council, as thou art, 
On cloud-sequestered heights, that see and hear 
To what dread Powers He delegates his part 
On earth, who works in the heaven of heavens, 
alone. 

THE EARL OF BREADALBANE'S RUINED MANSION, 
AND FAMILY BURIAL-PLACE, NEAR KILLIN. 
Well sang the Bard who called the grave, in strains 
Thoughtful and sad, the ' narrow house.' No style 
Of fond sepulchral flattery can beguile 
Grief of her sting ; no» cheat, where he' detains 
The sleeping dust, stern Death. How reconcile 
With truth, or with each other, decked remains 
Of a once warm Abode, and that new Pile, 
For the departed, built with curious pains 
And mausolean pomp ? Yet here they stand 
Together, — 'mid trim walks and artful bowers, 
To be looked down upon by ancient hills, 
That, for the living and the dead, demand 
And prompt a harmony of genuine powers ; 
Concord that elevates the mind, and stills. 

XIII. 
' REST AND BE THANKFUL t ' 
AT THE HEAD OF GLENCROE. 
Doubling and doubling with laborious walk, 
Who, that has gained at length the wished-foi 
Height, 
This brief this simple way-side Call can slight, 
And rests not thankful  Whether cheered by tall 
With some loved friend, or by the unseen hawk 
Whistling to clouds and sky-born streams, that thin 
At the sun's outbreak, as with light divine, 
Ere they descend to nourish root and stalk 
Of valley flowers. Nor, while the limbs repose, 
Will we forget that, as the fowl can keep 
Absolute stillness, poised aloft in air, 
And fishes front, unmoved, the torrent's sweep,- 
So may the Soul, through powers that Faith bestow 
Win rest, and ease, and peace, with bliss tlu 
Angels share. 

highland hut. 
See what gay wild flowers deck this earth-built Cc 
Whose smoke, forth-issuing whence and how it m 
Shines in the greeting of the sun's first ray 
Like wreaths of vapour without stain or blot. 
The limpid mountain rill avoids it not ; 
And why shouldst thou? — If rightly trained andbrt 
Humanity is humble, finds no spot 
Which her Heaven-guided feet refuse to tread. 
The walls are cracked, sunk is the flowery roof, 
Undressed the pathway leading to the door ; 
But love, as Nature loves, the lonely Poor ; 
Search, for their worth, some gentle heart wtoe 
proof, 
Meek, patient, kind, and, were its trials fewer, 
Belike less happy.— Stand no more aloof ! 

 In Gaelic, Buachaill Eile. 

THE HIGHLAND BROACH. 
The exact resemblance which the old Broach (■-•in in I 
though rarely met with, among the Highlanders) benr 
the Roman Fibula must strike every one, and conci 
with the plaid and kilt, to recal to mind the coniu.i 
cation which the ancient Romans had with this rem 
country. 
If to Tradition faith be due, 
And echoes from old verse speak true, 
 See Note. 



MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND, . 

 

Ere the meek Saint, Columba, bore 
Glad tidings to Iona's shore, 
No common light of nature blessed 
The mountain region of the west, 
A land where gentle manners ruled 
O'er men in dauntless virtues schooled, 
That raised, for centuries, a bar 
Impervious to the tide of war : 
Yet peaceful Arts did entrance gain 
. Where haughty Force had striven in vain ; 
j And, 'mid the works of skilful hands, 
By wanderers brought from foreign lands 
And various climes, was not unknown 
The clasp that fixed the Roman Gown ; 
! The Fibula, whose shape, I ween, 
: Still in the Highland Broach is seen, 
! The silver Broach of massy frame, 
' Worn at the breast of some grave Dame 
On road or path, or at the door 
Of fern-thatched hut on heathy moor : 
• But delicate of yore its mould, 
I And the material finest gold ; 
j As might beseem the fairest Fair, 
Whether she graced a royal chair, 
'■ Or shed, within a vaulted hall, 
; No fancied lustre on the wall 
; Where shields of mighty heroes hung, 
While Fingal heard what Ossian sung. 
The heroic Age expired — it slept 
Deep in its tomb :— the bramble crept 
j O'er Fingal's hearth ; the grassy sod 
i Grew on the floors his sons had trod : 
Malvina ! where art thou ? Their state 
| The noblest-born must abdicate ; 
( The fairest, while with fire and sword 
; Come Spoilers — horde impelling horde, 
Must walk the sorrowing mountains, drest 
(By ruder hands in homelier vest. 
Yet still the female bosom lent, 
And loved to borrow, ornament ; 
Still was its inner world a place 
; Reached by the clews of heavenly grace ; 
'< Still pity to this last retreat 
\ Clove fondly ; to his favourite seat 
-Love wound his way by soft approach, 
| Beneath a massier Highland Broach. 
(When alternations came of rage 
! Yet fiercer, in a darker age ; 
I And feuds, where, clan encountering clan, 
The weaker perished to a man ; 
(For maid and mother, when despair 
j Might else have triumphed, baffling prayer, 

One small possession lacked not power, 
Provided in a calmer hour, 
To meet such need as might befal — 
Roof, raiment, bread, or burial : 
For woman, even of tears bereft 
The hidden silver Broach was left. 
As generations come and go 
Their arts, their customs, ebb and flow ; 
Fate, fortune, sweep strong powers away, 
And feeble, of themselves, decay ; 
What poor abodes the heir-loom hide, 
In which the castle once took pride ! 
Tokens, once kept as boasted wealth, 
If saved at all, are saved by stealth. 
Lo ! ships, from seas by nature barred, 
Mount along ways by man prepared ; 
And in far-stretching vales, whose streams 
Seek other seas, their canvass gleams. 
Lo ! busy towns spring up, on coasts 
Thronged yesterday by airy ghosts ; 
Soon, like a lingering star forlorn 
Among the novelties of morn, 
While young delights on old encroach, 
Will vanish the last Highland Broach. 
But when, from out their viewless bed, 
Like vapours, years have rolled and spread ; 
And this poor verse, and worthier lays, 
Shall yield no light of love or praise ; 
Then, by the spade, or cleaving plough, 
Or torrent from the mountain's brow, 
Or whirlwind, reckless what his might 
Entombs, or forces into light ; 
Blind Chance, a volunteer ally, 
That oft befriends Antiquity, 
And clears Oblivion from reproach, 
May render back the Highland Broach. 

 How much the Broach is sometimes prized by persons 
in humble stations may be gathered from an occurrence 
mentioned to me by a female friend. She had had an 
opportunity of benefiting a poor old woman in her own 
hut, who, wishing to make a return, said to her daughter, 
in Erse, in a tone of plaintive earnestness, " I would give 
anything I have, but I hope she does not wish for my 
Broach !" and, uttering these words, she put her hand upon 
the Broach which fastened her kerchief, and which, she 
imagined, had attracted the eye of her benefactress. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

THE BROWNIE. 
Upon a small island not far from the head of Loch 
Lomond, are some remains of an ancient building, which 
was for several years the abode of a solitary Individual, 
one of the last survivors of the clan of Macfarlane, once 
powerful in that neighbourhood. Passing along the 
shore opposite this island in the year , the Author 
learned these particulars, and that this person then 
living there had acquired the appellation of ' The 
Brownie.' See " The Brownie's Cell," p. , to which 
the following is a sequel. 
'How disappeared he ? ' Ask the newt and toad ; 
Ask of his fellow men, and they will tell 
How he was found, cold as an icicle, 
Under an arch of that forlorn abode ; 
Where he, unpropp'd, and by the gathering flood 
Of years hemm'd round, had dwelt, prepared to try 
Privation's worst extremities, and die 
With no one near save the omnipresent God. 
Verily so to live was an awful choice — ■ 
A choice that wears the aspect of a doom ; 
But in the mould of mercy all is cast 
For Souls familiar with the eternal "Voice ; 
And this forgotten Taper to the last 
Drove from itself, we trust, all frightful gloom. 

TO THE PLANET VENUS, AN EVENING STAR. 
COMPOSED AT CH LOMOND. 
Though joy attend Thee orient at the birth 
Of dawn, it cheers the lofty spirit most 
To watch thy course when Day-light, fled from earth, 
In the grey sky hath left his lingering Ghost, 
Perplexed as if between a splendour lost 
And splendour slowly mustering. Since the Sun, 
The absolute, the world-absorbing One, 
Relinquished half his empire to the host 
Emboldened by thy guidance, holy Star, 
Holy as princely, who that looks on thee 
Touching, as now, in thy humility 
The mountain borders of this seat of care, 
Can question that thy countenance is bright, 
Celestial Power, as much with love as light ? 

XVIII. 
bothwell castle, 
(passed unseen, on accodnt op stormy weather.) 
Immured in Bothwell's towers, at times the Brave 
(So beautiful is Clyde) forgot to mourn 
The liberty they lost at Bannockburn. 
Once on those steeps /roamed at large, and have 

In mind the landscape, as if still in sight ; 
The river glides, the woods before me wave • 
Then why repine that now in vain I crave 
Needless renewal of an old delight ? 
Better to thank a dear and long-past day 
For joy its sunny hours were free to give 
Than blame the present, that our wish hath crost. 
Memory, like sleep, hath powers which dreams 
obey, 
Dreams, vivid dreams, that are not fugitive : 
How little that she cherishes is lost ! 

PICTURE OF DANIEL IN THE LION'S DEN, T 
HAMILTON PALACE. 
Amid a fertile region green with wood 
And fresh with rivers, well did it become 
The ducal Owner, in his palace-home 
To naturalise this tawny Lion brood ; 
Children of Art, that claim strange brotherhood 
(Couched in their den) with those that roam at iarg 
Over the burning wilderness, and charge 
The wind with terror while they roar for food 
Satiate are these; and stilled to eye and ear ; 
Hence, while we gaze, a more enduring feari 
Yet is the Prophet calm, nor would the cave 
Daunt him — if his Companions, now be-drowsel 
Outstretched and listless, were by hunger roused 
Man placed him here, and God, he knows, can sav 

THE AVON. 
(A FEEDER OF THE ANNAN.) 
Avon — a precious, an immortal name ! 
Yet is it one that other rivulets bear 
Like this unheard-of, and their channels wear 
Like this contented, though unknown to Fame 
For great and sacred is the modest claim 
Of Streams to Nature's love, where'er they flow 
And ne'er did Genius slight them, as they go. 
Tree, flower, and green herb, feeding without Man; 
But Praise can waste her voice on work of tear? 
Anguish, and death : full oft where innocent blo< 
Has mixed its current with the limpid flood, 
Her heaven-offending trophies Glory rears : 
Never for like distinction may the good 
Shrink from thy name, pure Rill, with unpleas 
ears. 

MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND, . 

 

i SUGGESTED BY A VIEW FROM AN EMINENCE TN 
INGLEWOOD FOREST. 
j he forest huge of ancient Caledon 
I but a name, no more is Inglewood, 
hat swept from lull to hill, from flood to flood : 
n her last thorn the nightly moon has shone ; 
et still, though unappropriate Wild be none, 
air parks spread wide where Adam Bell might deign 
i/ith Clym o' the Clough, were they alive again, 
jo kill for merry feast their venison. 
or wants the holy Abbot's gliding Shade 
is church with monumental wreck bestrown ; 
he feudal Warrior-chief, a Ghost unlaid, 
lath still his castle, though a skeleton, 
that he may watch by night, and lessons con 
f power that perishes, and rights that fade. 

HART'S-HORN TREE, NEAR PENRITH. 
ere stood an Oak, that long had borne affixed 
o his huge trunk, or, with more subtle art, 
mong its withering topmost brcinches mixed, 
!lie palmy antlers of a limited Hart, 
! r hom the Dog Hercules pursued — his part 
ach desperately sustaining, till at last 
oth sank and died, the life- veins of the chased 
nd chaser bursting here with one dire smart. 
j.utual the victory, mutual the defeat ! 
iigh was the trophy hung with pitiless pride ; 
iy, rather, with that generous sympathy 
lliat wants not, even in rudest breasts, a seat ; 
fd, for this feeling's sake, let no one chide 
rse that would guard thy memory, Hart's-horn 
Tree ! 

FANCY AND TRADITION. 
he Lovers took within this ancient grove 
lieir last embrace ; beside those crystal springs 
lie Hermit saw the Angel spread his wings 
->r instant flight ; the Sage in yon alcove 
ite musing ; on that hill the Bard would rove, 
ot mute, where now the linnet only sings : 
uus every where to truth Tradition clings, 
r Fancy localises Powers we love, 
'ere only History licensed to take note 
f things gone by, her meagre monuments 
fould ill suffice for persons and events : 
liere is an ampler page for man to quote, 
readier book of manifold contents, 
■udied alike in palace and in cot. 
 See Note. 

COUNTESS PILLAR. 
[On the roadside between Penrith and Appleby, there 
stands a pillar with the following inscription : — 
' This pillar was erected, in the year , by Anne 
Countess Dowager of Pembroke, &c. for a memorial of 
her last parting with her pious mother, Margaret Countess 
Dowager of Cumberland, on the d of April,  ; in 
memory whereof she hath left an annuity of . to be 
distributed to the poor of the parish of Brougham, every 
d day of April for ever, upon the stone table placed hard 
by. Laus Deo ! '] 
While the Poor gather round, till the end of time 
May this bright flower of Charity display 
Its bloom, unfolding at the appointed day ; 
Flower than the loveliest of the vernal prime 
Lovelier — transplanted from heaven's purest clime ! 
' Charity never faileth : ' on that creed, 
More than on written testament or deed, 
The pious Lady built with hope sublime. 
Alms on this stone to be dealt out, /or ever! 
' Laus Deo.' Many a Stranger passing by 
Has with that Parting mixed a filial sigh, 
Blest its humane Memorial's fond endeavour ; 
And, fastening on those lines an eye tear-glazed, 
Has ended, though no Clerk, with ' G od be praised ! ' 

ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. 
(FROM THE EOMAN STATION AT OLD PENBITH.) 
How profitless the relics that we cull, 
Troubling the last holds of ambitious Rome, 
Unless they chasten fancies that presume 
Too high, or idle agitations lull ! 
Of the world r s flatteries if the brain be full, 
To have no seat for thought were better doom, 
Like this old helmet, or the eyeless skull 
Of him who gloried in its nodding plume. 
Heaven out of view, our wishes what are they \ 
Our fond regrets tenacious in their grasp ? 
The Sage's theory \ the Poet's lay % — 
Mere Fibulae without a robe to clasp ; 
Obsolete lamps, whose fight no time recals ; 
Urns without ashes, tearless lacrymals ! 

XXVI. 
APOLOGY, 
FOR THE FOREGOING POEMS. 
No more : the end is sudden and abrupt, 
Abrupt — as without preconceived design 
Was the beginning ; yet the several Lays 
Have moved in order, to each other bound 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

By a continuous and acknowledged tie 
Though unapparent — like those Shapes distinct 
That yet survive ensculptured on the walls 
Of palaces, or temples, 'mid the wreck 
Of famed Persepolis ; each following each, 
As might beseem a stately embassy, 
In set array ; these bearing in their hands 
Ensign of civil power, weapon of war, 
Or gift to be presented at the throne 
Of the Great King ; and others, as they go 
In priestly vest, with holy offerings charged, 
Or leading victims drest for sacrifice. 
Nor will the Power we serve, that sacred Power, 
The Spirit of humanity, disdain 
A ministration humble but sincere, 
That from a threshold loved by every Muse 
Its impulse took — that sorrow-stricken door, 

Whence, as a current from its fountain-head, 
Our thoughts have issued, and our feelings flowed. 
Receiving, willingly or not, fresh strength 
From kindred sources ; while around us sighed 
(Life's three first seasons having passed away) 
Leaf-scattering winds; and hoar-frost sprinklings 
feU 
(Foretaste of winter) on the moorland heights ; 
And every day brought with it tidings new 
Of rash change, ominous for the public weaL 
Hence, if dejection has too oft encroached 
Upon that sweet and tender melancholy 
Which may itself be cherished and caressed 
More than enough ; a fault so natural 
(Even with the young, the hopeful, or the gay) 
For prompt frrgiveness will not sue in vain. 

EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 

Calm is the fragrant air, and loth to lose 
Day's grateful warmth, tho' moist with falling dews. 
Look for the stars, you ' say that there are none ; 
Look up a second time, and, one by one, 
You mark them twinkling out with silvery light, 
And wonder how they could elude the sight ! 
The birds, of late so noisy in their bowers, 
Warbled a while with faint and fainter powers, 
But now are silent as the dim-seen flowers : 
Nor does the village Church-clock's iron tone 
The time's and season's influence disown ; 
Nine beats distinctly to each other bound 
In drowsy sequence — how unlike the sound 
That, in rough winter, oft inflicts a fear 
On fireside listeners, doubting what they hear ! 
The shepherd, bent on rising with the sun, 
Had closed his door before the day was done, 
And now with thankful heart to bed doth creep, 
And joins his little children in their sleep. 
The bat, lured forth where trees the lane o'ershade, 
Flits and reflits along the close arcade ; 
The busy dor-hawk chases the white moth 
With burring note, which Industry and Sloth 
Might both be pleased with, for it suits them both. 
A stream is heard — I see it not, but know 
By r its soft music whence the waters flow : 

Wheels and the tread of hoofs are heard no more 
One boat there was, but it will touch the shore 
With the next dipping of its slackened oar : 
Faint sound, that, for the gayest of the gay, 
Might give to serious thought a moment's sway, 
As a last token of man's toilsome day ! 
KB. 

ir. 
ON A HIGH PART OF THE COAST OF CUMBEB-A>T- 
Easter Sunday, April - 
THE AUTHOB'S SIXTT-THIBD BntTH-DAT. 
The Sun, that seemed so mildly to retire, 
Flung back from distant climes a streaming fire, 
Whose blaze is now subdued to tender gleams, 
Prelude of night's approach with soothing dn-ar 
Look round ; — of all the clouds not one is D 
'Tis the still hour of thinking, feeling, loving. 
Silent, and stedfast as the vaulted sky, 
The boundless plain of waters seems to lie :— 
Comes that low sound from breezes rustling o'er 
The grass-crowned headland that conceals the 
shore ? 
No ; 'tis the earth-voice of the mighty sea, 
Whispering how meek and gentle he can be ! 

EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 

 

Thou Power supreme ! who, arming to rebuke 
(fenders, dost put off the gracious look, 
J A clothe thyself with terrors like the flood 
(ocean roused into Ms fiercest mood, 
l[ iatever discipline thy Will ordain 
Ir the brief course that must for me remain ; 
r Jich me with quick-eared spirit to rejoice 
I admonitions of thy softest voice ! 
 late'er the path these mortal feet may trace, 
jjeathe through my soul the blessing of thy grace, 
(U, through a perfect love, a faith sincere 
 awn from the wisdom that begins with fear, 
(lid to expand ; and, for a season, free 
l)m finite cares, to rest absorbed in Thee ! 
. 

(by the sea-side.) 
I e sun is couched, the sea-fowl gone to rest, 
I I the wild storm hath somewhere found a nest ; 
slumbers — wave with wave no longer strives, 
< y a heaving of the deep survives, 
I ell-tale motion ! soon will it be laid, 
I I by the tide alone the water swayed. 
S althy wiihdra wings, interminglings mild 
( light with shade in beauty reconciled — 
£ :h is the prospect far as sight can range, 
'],; soothing recompence, the welcome change. 
\iere now the ships that drove before the blast, 
Veatened by angry breakers as they passed ; 
j\i by a train of flying clouds bemocked ; 
( in the hollow surge, at anchor rocked 
i on a bed of death ? Some lodge in peace, 
' r ed by His care who bade the tempest cease ; 
id some, too heedless of past danger, court 
] sh gales to waft them to the far-off port ; 
  near, or hanging sea and sky between, 
  one of all those winged powers is seen, 
''in in her course, nor 'mid this quiet heard ; 
t oh ! how gladly would the air be stirred 
some acknowledgment of thanks and praise, 
|'t in its temper as those vesper lays 
>' :g to the Virgin while accordant oars 
 ge the slow bark along Calabrian shores ; 
iea-born service through the mountains felt 
'  into one loved vision all things melt : 
like those hymns that soothe with graver sound 
e gulfy coast of Norway iron-bound ; 
- d, from the wide and open Baltic, rise 
;th punctual care, Lutherian harmonies. 
J sh, not a voice is here ! but why repine, 
 w when the star of eve comes forth to shine 

On British waters with that look benign \ 
Ye mariners, that plough your onward way, 
Or in the haven rest, or sheltering bay, 
May silent thanks at least to God be given 
With a full heart ; ' our thoughts are heard in 
heaven !' 
. 

Not in the lucid intervals of life 
That come but as a curse to party-strife ; 
Not in some hour when Pleasure with a sigh 
Of languor puts his rosy garland by ; 
Not in the breathing-times of that poor slave 
Who daily piles up wealth in Mammon's cave — 
Is Nature felt, or can be ; nor do words, 
Which practised talent readily affords, 
Prove thatherhandhas touched responsive chords ; 
Nor has her gentle beauty power to move 
With genuine rapture and with fervent love 
The soul of Genius, if he dare to take 
Life's rule from passion craved for passion's sake ; 
Untaught that meekness is the cherished bent 
Of all the truly great and all the innocent. 
But who is innocent ? By grace divine, 
Not otherwise, Nature ! we are thine, 
Through good and evil thine, in just degree 
Of rational and manly sympathy. 
To all that Earth from pensive hearts is stealing, 
And Heaven is now to gladdened eyes revealing, 
Add every charm the Universe can show 
Through every change its aspects undergo — 
Care may be respited, but not repealed ; 
No perfect cure grows on that bounded field. 
Vain is the pleasure, a false calm the peace, 
If He, through whom alone our conflicts cease, 
Our virtuous hopes without relapse advance, 
Come not to speed the Soul's deliverance ; 
To the distempered Intellect refuse 
His gracious help, or give what we abuse. 

(by the side of bydal mebe.) 
The linnet's warble, sinking towards a close, 
Hints to the thrush 'tis time for their repose ; 
The shrill-voiced thrush is heedless, and again 
The monitor revives his own sweet strain ; 
But both will soon be mastered, and the copse 
Be left as silent as the mountain-tops, 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Ere some commanding star dismiss to rest 
The throng of rooks, that now, from twig or nest, 
(After a steady flight on home-bound wings, 
And a last game of mazy hoverings 
Around their ancient grove) with cawing noise 
Disturb the liquid music's equipoise. 
Nightingale ! ' Who ever heard thy song 
Might here be moved, till Fancy grows so strong 
That listening sense is pardonably cheated 
Where wood or stream by thee was never greeted. 
Surely, from fairest spots of favoured lands, 
Were not some gifts withheld by jealous hands, 
This hour of deepening darkness here would be 
As a fresh morning for new harmony ; 
And lays as prompt would hail the dawn of Night : 
A dawn she has both beautiful and bright, 
When the East kindles with the full moon's light ; 
Not like the rising sun's impatient glow 
Dazzling the mountains, but an overflow 
Of solemn splendour, in mutation slow. 
Wanderer by spring with gradual progress led, 
For sway profoundly felt as widely spread ; 
To king, to peasant, to rough sailor, dear, 
And to the soldier's trumpet-wearied ear ; 
How welcome wouldst thou be to this green Vale 
Fairer than Tempe ! Yet, sweet Nightingale ! 
From the warm breeze that bears thee on, alight 
At will, and stay thy migratory flight ; 
Build, at thy choice, or sing, by pool or fount, 
Who shall complain, or call thee to account ? 
The wisest, happiest, of our kind are they 
That ever walk content with Nature's way, 
God's goodness — measuring bounty as it may ; 
For whom the gravest thought of what they miss, 
Chastening the fulness of a present bliss, 
Is with that wholesome office satisfied, 
While unrepining sadness is allied 
In thankful bosoms to a modest pride. 
. 

Soft as a cloud is yon blue Ridge — the Mere 
Seems firm as solid crystal, breathless, clear, 
And motionless ; and, to the gazer's eye, 
Deeper than ocean, in the immensity 
Of its vague mountains and unreal sky ! 
But, from the process in that still retreat, 
Turn to minuter changes at our feet ; 
Observe how dewy Twilight has withdrawn 
The crowd of daisies from the shaven lawn, 

And has restored to view its tender green, 
That, while the sun rode high, was lost beneath 
their dazzling sheen. 
— An emblem this of what the sober Hour 
Can do for minds disposed to feel its power ! 
Thus oft, when we in vain have wish'd awav 
The petty pleasures of the garish day, 
Meek eve shuts up the whole usurping host 
(Unbashful dwarfs each glittering at his post) 
And leaves the disencumbered spirit free 
To reassume a staid simplicity. 
'Tis well — but what are helps of time and phee 
When wisdom stands in need of nature's grace ; 
Why do good thoughts, invoked or not, descend, 
Like Angels from their bowers, our virtues to be- 
friend ; 
If yet To-morrow, unbelied, may say, 
" I come to open out, for fresh display, 
The elastic vanities of yesterday ? " 
M 

The leaves that rustled on this oak-crowned hill, 
And sky that danced among those leaves, are still : 
Rest smooths the way for sleep ; in field and bower 
Soft shades and dews have shed their MemkJ 
power 
On drooping eyelid and the closing flower ; 
Sound is there none at which the faintest heart 
Might leap, the weakest nerve of superstition start ; 
Save when the Owlet's unexpected scream 
Pierces the ethereal vault ; and (mid the gleam 
Of unsubstantial imagery, the dream, 
From the hushed vale's realities, transferred 
To the still lake) the imaginative Bird 
Seems, 'mid inverted mountains, not unheard. 
Grave Creature ! — whether, while the nioon 
shines bright 
On thy wings opened wide for smoothest flight, 
Thou art discovered in a roofless tower, 
Rising from what may once have been a lath - 
bower ; 
Or spied where thou sitt'st moping in thy BMW 
At the dim centre of a churchyard yew ; 
Or, from a rifted crag or ivy tod 
Deep in a forest, thy secure abode, 
Thou giv'st, for pastime's sake, by shriek or shout, 
A puzzling notice of thy whereabout — 
May the night never come, nor day be seen, 
When I shall scorn thy voice or mock thy mien ! 

EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 

 

In classic ages men perceived a soul 
f sapience in thy aspect, headless Owl ! 
fhee Athens reverenced in the studious grove ; 
nd, near the golden sceptre grasped by Jove, 
[is Eagle's favourite perch, while round him sate 
he Gods revolving the decrees of Fate, 
, too, wert present at Minerva's side : — 
ark to that second larum ! — far and wide 
ie elements have heard, and rock and cave replied. 
. 

ibis Impromptu appeared, many years ago, among the 
Author's poems, from which, in subsequent editions, it 
ivas excluded. It is reprinted, at the request of the 
Mend in whose presence the lines were thrown off.] 
i The sun has long been set, 
The stars are out by twos and threes, 
The little birds are piping yet 
Among the bushes and trees ; 
There's a cuckoo, and one or two thrushes, 
And a far-off wind that rushes, 
And a sound of water that gushes, 
And the cuckoo's sovereign cry 
Fills all the hollow of the sky. 
Who would ' go parading ' 
In London, ' and masquerading,' 
On such a night of June 
With that beautiful soft half-moon, 
And all these innocent blisses ? 
On such a night as this is ! 

MPOSED UPON AN EVENING OF EXTRAORDINARY 
SPLENDOUR AND BEAUTY. 

d this effulgence disappeared 
th flying haste, I might have sent, 
..long the speechless clouds, a look 
' blank astonishment ; 
jt 'tis endued with power to stay, 
d sanctify one closing day, 
fet frail Mortality may see — ■ 
pat is ? — ah no, but what can be ! 
ne was when field and watery cove 
iith modulated echoes rang, 
jiile choirs of fervent Angels sang 
' eir vespers in the grove ; 

Or, crowning, star-like, each some sovereign height, 
Warbled, for heaven above and earth below, 
Strains suitable to both. — Such holy rite, 
Methinks, if audibly repeated now 
From hill or valley, could not move 
Sublimer transport, purer love, 
Than doth this silent spectacle — the gleam — 
The shadow — and the peace supreme ! 

No sound is uttered, — but a deep 
And solemn harmony pervades 
The hollow vale from steep to steep, 
And penetrates the glades. 
Far-distant images draw nigh, 
Called forth by wondrous potency 
Of beamy radiance, that imbues, 
Whate'er it strikes, with gem-like hues ! 
In vision exquisitely clear, 
Herds range along the mountain side ; 
And glistening antlers are descried ; 
And gilded flocks appear. 
Thine is the tranquil hour, purpureal Eve ! 
But long as god-like wish, or hope divine, 
Informs my spirit, ne'er can I believe 
That this magnificence is wholly thine ! 
— From worlds not quickened by the sun 
A portion of the gift is won ; 
An intermingling of Heaven's pomp is spread 
On ground which British shepherds tread ! 

And, if there be whom broken ties 
Afflict, or injuries assail, 
Yon hazy ridges to their eyes 
Present a glorious scale, 
Climbing suffused with sunny ah, 
To stop — no record hath told where ! 
And tempting Fancy to ascend, 
And with immortal Spirits blend ! 
— Wings at my shoulders seem to play ; 
But, rooted here, I stand and gaze 
On those bright steps that heaven-ward raise 
Their practicable way. 
Come forth, ye drooping old men, look abroad, 
And see to what fair countries ye are bound ! 
And if some traveller, weary of his road, 
Hath slept since noon-tide on the grassy ground, 
Ye Genii ! to his covert speed ; 
And wake him with such gentle heed 
As may attune his soul to meet the dower 
Bestowed on this transcendent hour ! 

 f> 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

- 

Such hues from their celestial Urn 
"Were wont to stream before mine eye, 
Where'er it wandered in the morn 
Of blissful infancy. 
This glimpse of glory, why renewed ? 
Nay, rather speak with gratitude ; 
For, if a vestige of those gleams 
Survived, 'twas only in my dreams. 
Dread Power ! whom peace and calmness serve 
No less than Nature's threatening voice, 
If aught unworthy be my choice, 
From Thee if I would swerve ; 
Oh, let thy grace remind me of the light 
Full early lost, and fruitlessly deplored ; 
Which, at this moment, on my waking sight 
Appears to shine, by miracle restored ; 
My soul, though yet confined to earth, 
Rejoices in a second birth ! 
— 'Tis past, the visionary splendour fades ; 
And night approaches with her shades. 
. 
Note. — The multiplication of mountain-ridges, described 
at the commencement of the third Stanza of this Ode, as a 
kind of Jacob's Ladder, leading to Heaven, is produced 
either by watery vapours, or sunny haze ; — in the present 
instance by the latter cause. Allusions to the Ode, entitled 
' Intimations of Immortality,' pervade the last stanza of 
the foregoing Poem. 

COMPOSED BY THE SEA-SHORE. 
What mischief cleaves to unsubdued regret, 
How fancy sickens by vague hopes beset ; 
How baffled projects on the spirit prey, 
And fruitless wishes eat the heart away, 
The Sailor knows ; he best, whose lot is cast 
On the relentless sea that holds him fast 
On chance dependent, and the fickle star 
Of power, through long and melancholy war. 
sad it is, in sight of foreign shores, 
Daily to think on old familiar doors, 
Hearths loved in childhood, and ancestral floors ; 
Or, tossed about along a waste of foam, 
To ruminate on that delightful home 
Which with the dear Betrothed was to come ; 
Or came and was and is, yet meets the eye 
Never but in the world of memory ; 
Or in a dream recalled, whose smoothest range 
Is crossed by knowledge, or by dread, of change, 

And if not so, whose perfect joy makes sleep 
A thing too bright for breathing man to keep. 
Hail to the virtues which that perilous life 
Extracts from Nature's elemental strife ; 
And welcome glory won in battles fought 
As bravely as the foe was keenly sought. 
But to each gallant Captain and his crew 
A iess imperious sympathy is due, 
Such as my verse now yields, while moonbeams pla 
On the mute sea in this unruffled bay ; 
Such as will promptly flow from every breast 
Where good men, disappointed in the quest 
Of wealth and power and honours, long for rest ■ 
Or, having known the splendours of success, 
Sigh for the obscurities of happiness. 

The Crescent-moon, the Star of Love. 
Glories of evening, as ye there are seen 
With but a span of sky between — 
Speak one of you, my doubts remove, 
Which is the attendant Page and which the Qneei 

TO THE MOON. 

(COMPOSED BY THE SEA-SIDE, — ON THE COAST OF 
CUMBERLAND.) 
Wanderer ! that stoop'st so low, and com'stsone 
To human life's unsettled atmosphere ; 
Who lov'st with Night and Silence to partake, 
So might it seem, the cares of them that wake ; 
And, through the cottage-lattice softly peeping, 
Dost shield from harm the humblest of the sleepin; 
What pleasure once encompassed those sweet nam 
Which yet in thy behalf the Poet claims, 
An idolizing dreamer as of yore ! — 
I slight them all ; and, on this sea-beat shore 
Sole-sitting, only can to thoughts attend 
That bid me hail thee as the Sailor's Friend ; 
So call thee for heaven's grace through thee ma>' 
known 
By confidence supplied and mercy shown, 
When not a twinkling star or beacon's light 
Abates the perils of a stormy night ; 
And for less obvious benefits, that find 
Their way, with thy pure help, to heart and mini 
Both for the adventurer starting in life's prime ; 
And veteran ranging round from clime to clime, 

EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 

 

jong-baffled hope's slow fever in his veins, 
Ind wounds and weakness oft his labour's sole 
remains. 
The aspiring Mountains and the winding Streams, 
Impress of Night ! are gladdened by thy beams ; 
L look of thine the wilderness pervades, 
t nd penetrates the forest's inmost shades ; 
'hou, chequering peaceably the minster's gloom, 
;ruid'st the pale Mourner to the lost one's tomb ; 
'anst reach the Prisoner — to his grated cell 
Velcome, though silent and intangible ! — 
L nd lives there one, of all that come and go 
>n the great waters toiling to and fro, 
'ne, who has watched thee at some quiet hour 
Inthroned aloft in undisputed power, 
>r crossed by vapoury streaks and clouds that move 
'atching the lustre they in part reprove — 
lor sometimes felt a fitness in thy sway 
o call up thoughts that shun the glare of day, 
.nd make the serious happier than the gay ? 
Yes, lovely Moon ! if thou so mildly bright 
Dost rouse, yet surely in thy own despite, 
'o fiercer mood the phrenzy-stricken brain, 
i.et me a compensating faith maintain ; 
'hat there 's a sensitive, a tender, part 
'Vhick thou canst touch in every human heart, 
for healing and composure. — But, as least 
j.nd mightiest billows ever have confessed 
hy domination ; as the whole vast Sea 
!eels through her lowest depths thy sovereignty ; 
;o shines that countenance with especial grace 
n them who urge the keel her plains to trace 
urrowing its way right onward. The most rude, 
ut off from home and country, may have stood — 
iven till long gazing hath bedimmed his eye, 
r the mute rapture ended in a sigh — 
ouched by accordance of thy placid cheer, 
Vith. some internal lights to memory dear, 
t fancies stealing forth to soothe the breast 
;red with its daily share of earth's unrest, — 
i entle awakenings, visitations meek ; 
|. kuxlly influence whereof few will speak, 
I hough it can wet with tears the hardiest cheek. 
And when thy beauty in the shadowy cave 
 hidden, buried in its monthly grave ; 
i'hen, while the Sailor, mid an open sea 
wept by a favouring wind that leaves thought free, 
'aces the deck — no star perhaps in sight, 
-nd nothing save the moving ship's own light 
o cheer the long dark hours of vacant night — 

Oft with his musings does thy image blend, 
In his mind's eye thy crescent horns ascend, 
And thou art still, O Moon, that Sailor's Friend 
. 

TO THE MOON. 

(KTDAI,.) 
Queen of the stars ! — so gentle, so benign, 
That ancient Fable did to thee assign, 
When darkness creeping o'er thy silver brow 
Warned thee these upper regions to forego, 
Alternate empire in the shades below — 
A Bard, who, lately near the wide-spread sea 
Traversed by gleaming ships, looked up to thee 
With grateful thoughts, doth now thy rising hail 
From the close confines of a shadowy vale. 
Glory of night, conspicuous yet serene, 
Nor less attractive when by glimpses seen 
Through cloudy umbrage, well might that fair face, 
And all those attributes of modest grace, 
In days when Fancy wrought unchecked by fear, 
Down to the green earth fetch thee from thy sphere, 
To sit in leafy woods by fountains clear ! 
still belov'd (for thine, meek Power, are charms 
That fascinate the very Babe in arms, 
While he, uplifted towards thee, laughs outright, 
Spreading his little palms in his glad Mother's sight) 
O still belov'd, once worshipped ! Time, that frowns 
In his destructive flight on earthly crowns, 
Spares thy mild splendour; still those far-shot 
beams 
Tremble on dancing waves and rippling streams 
With stainless touch, as chaste as when thy praise 
Was sung by Virgin-choirs in festal lays ; 
And through dark trials still dost thou explore 
Thy way for increase punctual as of yore, 
When teeming Matrons — yielding to rude faith 
In mysteries of birth and life and death 
And painful struggle and deliverance — prayed 
Of thee to visit them with lenient aid. 
What though the rites be swept away, the fanes 
Extinct that echoed to the votive strains ; 
Yet thy mild aspect does not, cannot, cease 
Love to promote and purity and peace ; 
And Fancy, unreproved, even yet may trace 
Faint types of suffering in thy beamless face. 
Then, silent Monitress ! let us — not blind 
To worlds unthought of till the searching mind 
Of Science laid them open to mankind — 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

= 

Told, also, how the voiceless heavens declare 
God's glory; and acknowledging thy share 
In that blest charge; let us — without offence 
To aught of highest, holiest, influence — 
Receive whatever good 'tis given thee to dispense. 
May sage and simple, catching with one eye 
The moral intimations of the sky, 

Learn from thy course, where'er their own be taken 
'To look on tempests, and be never shaken •' 
To keep with faithful step the appointed way 
Eclipsing or eclipsed, by night or day, 
And from example of thy monthly range 
Gently to brook decline and fatal change ; 
Meek, patient, stedfast, and with loftier scope, 
Than thy revival yields, for gladsome hope ! 
. 

POEMS, 
COMPOSED OR SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, IN THE SUMMER OP . 
[Having been prevented by the lateness of the season, in , from visiting Staffa and Iona, the author made the the 
principal objects of a short tour in the summer of , of which the following series of poems is a Memorial. The cour 
pursued was down the Cumberland river Derwent, and to Whitehaven ; thence (by the Isle of Man, where a few days 
were passed) up the Frith of Clyde to Greenock, then to Oban, Staffa, Iona; and back towards England, by Loch 
Awe, Inverary, Loch Goil-head, Greenock, and through parts of Renfrewshire, Ayrshire, and Dumfries-shire to Carlisle. |i 
and thence up the river Eden, and homewards by Ullswater.] 

Adieu, Rydalian Laurels ! that have grown 
And spread as if ye knew that days might come 
When ye would shelter in a happy home, 
On this fair Mount, a Poet of your own, 
One who ne'er ventured for a Delphic crown 
To sue the God ; but, haunting your green shade 
All seasons through, is humbly pleased to braid 
Ground-flowers, beneath your guardianship, self 
sown. 
Farewell ! no Minstrels now with harp new-strung 
For summer wandering quit their householdbowers ; 
Yet not for this wants Poesy a tongue 
To cheer the Itinerant on whom she pours 
Her spirit, while he crosses lonely moors, 
Or musing sits forsaken halls among. 

Why should the Enthusiast, journeying through 
this Isle 
Repine as if his hour were come too late \ 
Not unprotected in her mouldering state, 
Antiquity salutes him with a smile, 
Mid fruitful fields that ring with jocund toil, 
And pleasure-grounds where Taste, refined Co-mate 

Of Truth and Beauty, strives to imitate, 
Far as she may, primeval Nature's style. 
Fair Land ! by Time's parental love made free, 
By Social Order's watchful arms embraced ; 
With unexampled union meet in thee, 
For eye and mind, the present and the past ; 
With golden prospect for futurity, 
If that be reverenced which ought to last. 

They called Thee Merry England, in old time ; 
A happy people won for thee that name 
With envy heard in many a distant clime ; 
And, spite of change, for me thou keep'st the fuuae 
Endearing title, a responsive chime 
To the heart's fond belief ; though some there W 
Whose sterner judgments deem that word a snai't 
For inattentive Fancy, like the lime 
Which foolish birds are caught with. Can, I asK. 
This face of rural beauty be a mask 
For discontent, and poverty, and crime ; 
These spreading towns a cloak for lawless will ? 
Forbid it, Heaven ! — and Merry England still 
Shall be thy rightful name, in prose and rhyme ! 

SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 

TO THE RIYER GRETA, NEAR KESWICK. 
i eta, what fearful listening ! when huge stones 
limble along thy bed, block after block : 
( whirling with reiterated shock, 
Cnbat, while darkness aggravates the groans : 
ft if thou (like Cocytus from the moans 
 ird on his rueful margin) thence wert named 
% Mourner, thy true nature was defamed, 
/ji the habitual murmur that atones 
Sf thy worst rage, forgotten. Oft as Spring 
 :ks, on thy sinuous banks, her thousand thrones, 
ts of glad instinct and love's carolling, 
li: concert, for the happy, then may vie 
\ th liveliest peals of birth-day harmony : 
' a grieved heart, the notes are benisons. 

TO THE RIVER DERWENT. 
Jong the mountains were we nursed, loved 
Stream ! 
 m near the eagle's nest — within brief sail, 
I f his bold wing floating on the gale, 
Vere thy deep voice could lull me ! Faint the 
■ human life when first allowed to gleam [beam 
Clmortal notice. — Glory of the vale, 
■ h thy meek outset, with a crown, though frail, 
Bit in perpetual verdure by the steam 
i thy soft breath ! — Less vivid wreath entwined 
 nnean victor's brow ; less bright was worn, 
fy?d of some Roman chief — in triumph borne 
Tjth captives chained ; and shedding from his car 
ft sunset splendours of a finished war 
Km the proud enslavers of mankind ! 

| IN SIGHT OF THE TOWN OF COCKERMOUTH. 
'i ere the Author was born, and his Father's remains 
ielaid.) 
oint of life between my Parents' dust, 
AI yours, my buried Little-ones ! am  ; 
■p to those graves looking habitually 
 kindred quiet I repose my trust, 
I 

th to the innocent is more than just, 
, to the sinner, mercifully bent ; 
may I hope, if truly I repent 
n meekly bear the ills which bear I must : 
^jl You, my Offspring ! that do still remain, 
may outstrip me in the appointed race, 
'er, through fault of mine, in mutual pain 
breathed together for a moment's space, 
wrong, by love provoked, let love arraign, 
 only love keep in your hearts a place. 

ADDRESS FROM THE SPIRIT OF COCKERMOUTH 
CASTLE. 
" Thou look'st upon me, and dost fondly think, 
Poet ! that, stricken as both are by years, 
We, differing once so much, are now Compeers, 
Prepared, when each has stood his time, to sink 
Into the dust. Erewhile a sterner link 
United us ; when thou, in boyish play, 
Entering my dungeon, didst become a prey 
To soul-appalling darkness. Not a blink 
Of light was there ; — and thus did I, thy Tutor, 
Make thy young thoughts acquainted with the grave ; 
While thou wert chasing the wing'd butterfly 
Through my green courts ; or climbing, a bold suitor, 
Up to the flowers whose golden progeny 
Still round my shattered brow in beauty wave." 

nun's well, brigham. 
The cattle crowding round this beverage clear 
To slake their thirst, with reckless hoofs have trod 
The encircling turf into a barren clod ; 
Through which the waters creep, then disappear, 
Born to be lost in Derwent flowing near ; 
Yet, o'er the brink, and round the lime-stone cell 
Of the pure spring (they call it the " Nun's Well," 
Name that first struck by chance my startled ear) 
A tender Spirit broods — the pensive Shade 
Of ritual honours to this Fountain paid 
By hooded Votaresses with saintly cheer ; 
Albeit oft the Virgin-mother mild 
Looked down with pity upon eyes beguiled 
Into the shedding of 'too soft a tear.' 

to a friend, 
(on the bakes of the dekwent.) 
Pastor and Patriot !— at whose bidding rise 
These modest walls, amid a flock that need, 
For one who comes to watch them and to feed, 
A fixed Abode — keep down presageful sighs. 
Threats, which the unthinking only can despise, 
Perplex the Church ; but be thou firm, — be true 
To thy first hope, and this good work pursue, 
Poor as thou art. A welcome sacrifice 
Dost Thou prepare, whose sign will be the smoke 
Of thy new hearth ; and sooner shall its wreaths, 
Mounting while earth her morning incense breathes, 
From wandering fiends of air receive a yoke, 
And straightway cease to aspire, than God disdain 
This humble tribute as ill-timed or vain. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 
(LANDING AT THE MOUTH OP THE DERWENT, WORKINGTON.) 
Dear to the Loves, and to the Graces vowed, 
The Queen drew back the wimple that she wore ; 
And to the throng, that on the Cumbrian shore 
Her landing hailed, how touchingly she bowed ! 
And like a Star (that, from a heavy cloud 
Of pine-tree foliage poised in ah-, forth darts. 
When a soft summer gale at evening parts 
The gloom that did its loveliness enshroud) 
She smiled ; but Time, the old Saturnian seer, 
Sighed on the wing as her foot pressed the strand, 
With step prelusive to a long array 
Of woes and degradations hand in hand — 
Weeping captivity, and shuddering fear 
Stilled by the ensanguined block of Fotheringay ■ 

STANZAS SUGGESTED IN A STEAM-BOAT OFF SAINT 
BEES' HEADS, ON THE COAST OF CUMBERLAND. 
If Life were slumber on a bed of down, 
Toil unimposed, vicissitude unknown, 
Sad were our lot: no hunter of the hare 
Exults like him whose javelin from the lair 
Has roused the lion ; no one plucks the rose, 
Whose proffered beauty in safe shelter blows 
'Mid a trim garden's summer luxuries, 
With joy like his who climbs, on hands and knees, 
For some rare plant, yon Headland of St. Bees. 
This independence upon oar and sail, 
This new indifference to breeze or gale, 
This straight-lined progress, furrowing a flat lea, 
And regular as if locked in certainty — 
Depress the hours. Up, Spirit of the storm ! 
That Courage may find something to perforin ; 
That Fortitude, whose blood disdains to freeze 
At Danger's bidding, may confront the seas, 
Firm as the towering Headlands of St. Bees. 
Dread cliff of Baruth ! that wild wish may sleep, 
Bold as if men and creatures of the Deep 
Breathed the same element ; too many wrecks 
Have struck thy sides, too many ghastly decks 
Hast thou looked down upon, that such a thought 
Should here be welcome, and in verse enwrought : 
With thy stern aspect better far agrees 
Utterance of thanks that we have past with ease, 
As millions thus shall do, the Headlands of St. Bees. 

Yet, while each useful Art augments her store 
What boots the gain if Nature should lose more ! 
And Wisdom, as she holds a Christian place 
In man's intelligence sublimed by grace l 
When Bega sought of yore the Cumbrian coast 
Tempestuous winds her holy errand cross'd : 
She knelt in prayer — the waves their wrath appease 
And, from her vow well weighed in Heaven's deerees 
Rose, where she touched the strand, the Chantr 
of St. Bees. 
' Cruel of heart were they, bloody of hand,' 
Who in these Wilds then struggled for command 
The strong were merciless, without hope the weak 
Till this bright Stranger came, fair as day-break, 
And as a cresset true that darts its length 
Of beamy lustre from a tower of strength ; 
Guiding the mariner through troubled seas, 
And cheering oft his peaceful reveries, 
Like the fixed Light that crowns yon Headland i 
St. Bees. 
To aid the Votaress, miracles believed 
Wrought in men's minds, like miracles achieved 
So piety took root ; and Song might tell 
What humanizing virtues near her cell 
Sprang up, and spread their fragrance wide aroun 
How savage bosoms melted at the sound 
Of gospel-truth enchained in harmonies 
Wafted o'er waves, or creeping through close tree 
From her religious Mansion of St. Bees. 
When her sweet Voice, that instrument of love, 
Was glorified, and took its place, above 
The silent stars, among the angelic quire, 
Her chantry blazed with sacrilegious fire, 
And perished utterly ; but her good deeds 
Had sown the spot, that witnessed them, with sev 
Which lay in earth expectant, till a breeze 
With quickening impulse answered their mute plei 
And lo ! a statelier pile, the Abbey of St. Bees. 
There are the naked clothed, the hungry fed ; 
And Charity extendeth to the dead 
Her intercessions made for the soul's rest 
Of tardy penitents ; or for the best 
Among the good (when love might else have sle 
Sickened, or died) in pious memory kept. 
Thanks to the austere and simple Devotees, 
Who, to that service bound by venial fees, 
Keep watch before the altars of St. Bees. 
Are not, in sooth, their Requiems sacred ties 
Woven out of passion's sharpest agonies, 

SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 

bdued, composed, and formalized by art, 
fix a wiser sorrow in the heart ? 
 e prayer for them whose hour is past away 
I ys to the Living, profit while ye may ! 
.little part, and that the worst, he sees 
 thinks that priestly cunning holds the keys 
 at best unlock the secrets of St. Bees. 
science, the timid being's inmost light, 
pe of the dawn and solace of the night, 
eers these Recluses with a steady ray 
many an hour when judgment goes astray. 
., ! scorn not hastily their rule who try 
Irth to despise, and flesh to mortify ; 
asume with zeal, in winged ecstasies 
prayer and praise forget their rosaries, 
r hear the loudest surges of St. Bees. 

t none so prompt to succour and protect 
I e forlorn traveller, or sailor wrecked 
the bare coast ; nor do they grudge the boon 
rich staff and cockle hat and sandal shoon 
,im for the pilgrim : and, though cliidings sharp 
]|y sometimes greet the strolling minstrel's harp, 
;is not then when, swept with sportive ease, 
] charms a feast-day throng of all degrees, 
] ightening the archway of revered St. Bees. 
 w did the cliffs and echoing hills rejoice 
 lat time the Benedictine Brethren's voice, 
] ploring, or commanding with meet pride, 
mnoned the Chiefs to lay their feuds aside, 
jjd under one blest ensign serve the Lord 
IsPalestine. Advance, indignant Sword ! 
Ivming till thou from Panym hands release 
at Tomb, dread centre of all sanctities 
u-sed in the quiet Abbey of St. Bees. 
. t look we now to them whose minds from far 
llow the fortunes which they may not share, 
bile in Judea Fancy loves to roam, 
• b helps to make a Holy-land at home : 
e Star of Bethlehem from its sphere invites 
' sound the crystal depth of maiden rights ; 
• d wedded Life, through scriptural mysteries, 
lavenward ascends with all her charities, 
'i'ight by the hooded Celibates of St. Bees. 
■jr be it e'er forgotten how by skill 
J cloistered Architects, free their souls to fill 
Ith love of God, throughout the Land were raised ! 
« urches, on whose symbolic beauty gazed 
Jasant and mail-clad Chief with pious awe; 
j at this day men seeing what they saw, 

Or the bare wreck of faith's solemnities, 
Aspire to more than earthly destinies ; 
Witness yon Pile that greets us from St. Bees. 
Yet more; around those Churches, gathered Towns 
Safe from the feudal Castle's haughty frowns ; 
Peaceful abodes, where Justice might uphold 
Her scales with even hand, and culture mould 
The heart to pity, train the mind in care 
For rules of life, sound as the Time could bear. 
Nor dost thou fail, thro' abject love of ease, 
Or hindrance raised by sordid purposes, 
To bear thy part in this good work, St. Bees. 
Who with the ploughshare clove the barren moors, 
And to green meadows changed the swampy shores ? 
Thinned the rank woods; and for the cheerful 
grange 
Made room where wolf and boar were used to range? 
Who taught, and showed by deeds, that gentler 
chains 
Should bind the vassal to Ms lord's domains ? 
The thoughtful Monks, intent their God to please, 
For Christ's dear sake, by human sympathies 
Poured from the bosom of thy Church, St. Bees ! 
But all availed not ; by a mandate given 
Through lawless will the Brotherhood was driven 
Forth from their cells ; their ancient House laid low 
In Reformation's sweeping overthrow. 
But now once more the local Heart revives, 
The inextinguishable Spirit strives. 
Oh may that Power who hushed the stormy seas, 
And cleared a way for the first Votaries, 
Prosper the new-born College of St. Bees ! 
Alas ! the Genius of our age, from Schools 
Less humble, draws her lessons, aims, and rules. 
To Prowess guided by her insight keen 
Matter and Spirit are as one Machine ; 
Boastful Idolatress of formal skill 
She in her own would merge the eternal will : 
Better, if Reason's triumphs match with these, 
Her flight before the bold credulities 
That furthered the first teaching of St. Bees. 
. 
 See Excursion, seventh part ; and Ecclesiastical 
Sketches, second part, near the beginning. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

IN THE CHANNEL, BETWEEN THE COAST OF CUM- 
BERLAND AND THE ISLE OF MAN. 
Ranging the heights of Scawfell or Black-comb, 
In his lone course the Shepherd oft will pause, 
And strive to fathom the mysterious laws 
By which the clouds, arrayed in light or gloom, 
On Mona settle, and the shapes assume 
Of all her peaks and ridges. What he draws 
From sense, faith, reason, fancy, of the cause, 
He will take with him to the silent tomb. 
Or, by his fire, a child upon his knee, 
Haply the untaught Philosopher may speak 
Of the strange sight, nor hide his theory 
That satisfies the simple and the meek, 
Blest in their pious ignorance, though weak 
To cope with Sages undevoutly free. 

AT SEA OFF THE ISLE OF MAN. 
Bold words affirmed, in days when faith was strong 
And doubts and scruples seldom teazed the brain, 
That no adventurer's bark had power to gain 
These shores if he approached them bent on wrong ; 
For, suddenly up-conjured from the Main, 
Mists rose to hide the Land — that search, though 
long 
And eager, might be still pursued in vain. 
O Fancy, what an age was that for song ! 
That age, when not by laws inanimate, 
As men believed, the waters were impelled, 
The air controlled, the stars their courses held ; 
But element and orb on acts did wait 
Of Powers endued with visible form, instinct 
With will, and to their work by passion linked. 

Desire we past illusions to recal? 
To reinstate wild Fancy, would we hide 
Truths whose thick veil Science has drawn aside ? 
No, — let this Age, high as she may, instal 
In her esteem the thirst that wrought man's fall, 
The universe is infinitely wide ; 
And conquering Reason, if self-glorified, 
Can nowhere move uncrossed by some new wall 
Or gulf of mystery, which thou alone, 
Imaginative Faith ! canst overleap, 
In progress toward the fount of Love, — the throne 
Of Power whose ministers the records keep 
Of periods fixed, and laws established, less 
Flesh to exalt than prove its nothingness. 

ON ENTERING DOUGLAS BAT, ISLE OF MAN. 
' Dignum laude virum Musa vetat moil' 
The feudal Keep, the bastions of Cohorn, 
Even when they rose to check or to repel 
Tides of aggressive war, oft served as well 
Greedy ambition, armed to treat with scorn 
Just limits ; but yon Tower, whose smiles adon 
This perilous bay, stands clear of all offence ; 
Blest work it is of love and innocence, 
A Tower of refuge built for the else forlorn. 
Spare it, ye waves, and lift the mariner, 
Struggling for life, into its saving arms ! 
Spare, too, the human helpers ! Do they stir 
'Mid your fierce shock like men afraid to die ? 
No ; their dread service nerves the heart it wan 
And they are led by noble Hillary. 

BY THE SEA-SHORE, ISLE OF MAN. 
Why stand we gazing on the sparkling Brine. 
With wonder srnit by its transparency, 
And all-enraptured with its purity ? — 
Because the unstained, the clear, the crystallim 
Have ever in them something of benign ; 
Whether in gem, in water, or in sky, 
A sleeping infant's brow, or wakeful eye 
Of a young maiden, only not divine. 
Scarcely the hand forbears to dip its palm 
For beverage drawn as from a mountain-well. 
Temptation centres in the liquid Calm ; 
Our daily raiment seems no obstacle 
To instantaneous plunging in, deep Sea ! 
And revelling in long embrace with theef 

ISLE OF MAN. 
A youth too certain of Ms power to wade 
On the smooth bottom of this clear bright Sf 
To sight so shallow, with a bather's glee 
Leapt from this rock, and but for timely aid 
He, by the alluring element betrayed, 
Had perished. Then might Sea-nymphs (and v 
Of self-reproach) have chanted elegies 
Bewailing his sad fate, when he was laid 
In peaceful earth : for, doubtless, he was frank 
Utterly in himself devoid of guile ; 
Knew not the double-dealing of a smile ; 
Nor aught that makes men's promises a Wank, 
Or deadly snare : and He survives to bless 
The Power that saved him in his strange distr 
 See Note. 
 The sea-water on the coast of the Isle of Man is 
gularly pure and beautiful 


SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 

ISLE OF MAN. 
id pangs of grief for lenient time too keen, 
rief that devouring waves had caused — or guilt 
liich they had witnessed, sway the man who built 
iiis Homestead, placed where nothing could be seen, 
ought heard, of ocean troubled or serene ? 
i tired Ship-soldier on paternal land, 
>iat o'er the channel holds august command, 
iie dwelling raised, — a veteran Marine. 
le, in disgust, turned from the neighbouring sea 
i> shun the memory of a listless life 
lat hung between two callings. May no strife 
jore hurtful here beset him, doomed though free, 
lf-doomed, to worse inaction, till his eye 
firink from the daily sight of earth and sky ! 

BY A RETIRED MARINER. 
(A FBIEND OF THE ADTJSOJ.) 
iom early youth I ploughed the restless Main, 
y mind as restless and as apt to change ; 

uough every clime and ocean did I range, 
i hope at length a competence to gain ; 
.ir poor to Sea I went, and poor I still remain. 
par after year I strove, but strove in vain, 
•id hardships manifold did I endure, 
Ir Fortune on me never deign'd to smile ; 
pt I at last a resting-place have found, 
ith just enough life's comforts to procure, 
| a snug Cove on this our favoured Isle, 
I peaceful spot where Nature's gifts abound ; 
en sure I have no reason to complain, 
.ough poor to Sea I went, and poor I still remain. 

AT BALA-SALA, ISLE OF MAN. 
(SUPPOSED TO BE WRITTEN BY A FRIEND.) 
tOKEN in fortune, but in mind entire 
;id sound in principle; I seek repose 
(here ancient trees this convent-pile enclose, 
• ruin beautiful. When vain desire 
;trudes on peace, I pray the eternal Sire 
| cast a soul-subduing shade on me, 
grey-haired, pensive, thankful Refugee ; 
shade — but with some sparks of heavenly fire 
ce to these cells vouchsafed. And when I note 
e old Tower's brow yellowed a with the beams 
sunset ever there, albeit streams 
 stormy weather-stains that semblance wrought, 
hank the silent Monitor, and say 
' ihine so, my aged brow, at all hours of the day !" 



 Rushen Abbey. 

TYNWALD HILL. 
Once on the top of Tynwald's formal mound 
(Still marked with green turf circles narrowing 
Stage above stage) would sit this Island's King, 
The laws to promulgate, enrobed and crowned ; 
While, compassing the little mount around, 
Degrees and Orders stood, each under each : 
Now, like to tilings within fate's easiest reach, 
The power is merged, the pomp a grave has found. 
Off with yon cloud, old Snafell ! that thine eye 
Over three Realms may take its widest range ; 
And let, for them, thy fountains utter strange 
Voices, thy winds break forth in prophecy, 
If the whole State must suffer mortal change, 
Like Mona's miniature of sovereignty. 

Despond who will — / heard a voice exclaim, 
" Though fierce the assault, and shatter'd the defence, 
It cannot be that Britain's social frame, 
The glorious work of time and providence, 
Before a flying season's rash pretence, 
Should fall ; that She, whose virtue put to shame, 
When Europe prostrate lay, the Conqueror's aim, 
Should perish, self-subverted. Black and dense 
The cloud is ; but brings that a day of doom 
To Liberty ? Her sun is up the while, 
That orb whose beams round Saxon Alfred shone : 
Then laugh, ye innocent Vales ! ye Streams, sweep 
on, 
Nor let one billow of our heaven-blest Isle 
Toss in the fanning wind a humbler plume." 

IN THE FRITH OF CLYDE, AILSA CRAG. 
DURING AN ECLIPSE OP THE SUN, JULY . 
Since risen from ocean, ocean to defy, 
Appeared the Crag of Ailsa, ne'er did morn 
With gleaming lights more gracefully adorn 
His sides, or wreathe with mist his forehead high: 
Now, faintly darkening with the sun's eclipse, 
Still is he seen, in lone sublimity, 
Towering above the sea and little ships ; 
For dwarfs the tallest seem while sailing by, 
Each for her haven ; with her freight of Care, 
Pleasure, or Grief, and Toil that seldom looks 
Into the secret of to-morrow's fare ; 
Though poor, yet rich, without the wealth of books, 
Or aught that watchful Love to Nature owes 
For her mute Powers, fix'd Forms, or transient 
Shows. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

ON THE FRITH OF CLYDE. 
(IN A STEAM-BOAT.) 
Arran ! a single- crested Teneriffe, 
A St. Helena next — in shape and hue, 
Varying her crowded peaks and ridges blue ; 
Who but must covet a cloud-seat, or skiff 
Built for the air, or winged Hippogriff ? 
That he might fly, where no one could pursue, 
From this dull Monster and her sooty crew ; 
And, as a God, light on thy topmost cliff. 
Impotent wish ! which reason would despise 
If the mind knew no union of extremes, 
No natural bond between the boldest schemes 
Ambition frames, and heart-humilities. 
Beneath stern mountains many a soft vale lies, 
And lofty springs give birth to lowly streams. 

ON REVISITING DUNOLLY CASTLE. 
[See former series, p. .] 
The captive Bird was gone ; — to cliff or moor 
Perchance had flown, delivered by the storm ; 
Or he had pined, and sunk to feed the worm : 
Him found we not : but, climbing a tall tower, 
There saw, impaved with rude fidelity 
Of art mosaic, in a roofless floor, 
An Eagle with stretched wings, but beamless eye- 
An Eagle that could neither wail nor soar. 
Effigy of the Vanished — (shall I dare 
To call thee so ?) or symbol of fierce deeds 
And of the towering courage which past times 
Rejoiced in — take, whate'er thou be, a share, 
Not undeserved, of the memorial rhymes 
That animate my way where'er it leads ! 

THE DUNOLLY EAGLE. 
Not to the clouds, not to the cliff, he flew ; 
But when a storm, on sea or mountain bred, 
Came and delivered him, alone he sped 
Into the castle-dungeon's darkest mew. 
Now, near his master's house in open view 
He dwells, and hears indignant tempests howl, 
Kennelled and chained. Ye tame domestic fowl, 
Beware of him ! Thou, saucy cockatoo, 
Look to thy plumage and thy life ! — The roe, 
Fleet as the west wind, is for Mm no quarry ; 
Balanced in ether he will never tarry, 
Eyeing the sea's blue depths. Poor Bird ! even so 
Doth man of brother man a creature make 
That clings to slavery for its own sad sake. 

WRITTEN IN A BLANK LEAF OF MACPHERSON's 
OSSIAN. 
Oft have I caught, upon a fitful breeze, 
Fragments of far-off melodies, 
With ear not coveting the whole, 
A part so charmed the pensive soul : 
While a dark storm before my sight 
Was yielding, on a mountain height 
Loose vapours have I watched, that won 
Prismatic colours from the sun ; 
Nor felt a wish that heaven would show 
The image of its perfect bow. 
What need, then, of these finished Strains? 
Away with counterfeit Remains ! 
An abbey in its lone recess, 
A temple of the wilderness, 
Wrecks though they be, announce with feeling 
The majesty of honest dealing. 
Spirit of Ossian ! if unbound 
In language thou may'st yet be found, 
If aught (intrusted to the pen 
Or floating on the tongues of men, 
Albeit shattered and impaired) 
Subsist thy dignity to guard, 
In concert with memorial claim 
Of old grey stone, and high-born name 
That cleaves to rock or pillared cave 
Where moans the blast, or beats the wave, 
Let Truth, stern arbitress of all, 
Interpret that Original, 
And for presumptuous wrongs atone ; — 
Authentic words be given, or none ! 
Time is not blind ; — yet He, who spares 
Pyramid pointing to the stars, 
Hath preyed with ruthless appetite 
On all that marked the primal flight 
Of the poetic ecstasy 
Into the land of mystery. 
No tongue is able to rehearse 
One measure, Orpheus ! of thy verse ; 
Musseus, stationed with his lyre 
Supreme among the Elysian quire, 
Is, for the dwellers upon earth, 
Mute as a lark ere morning's birth. 
Why grieve for these, though past away 
The music, and extinct the lay ? 
When thousands, by severer doom, 
Full early to the silent tomb 
Have sunk, at Nature's call ; or strayed 
From hope and promise, self-betrayed ; 

SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 

The garland withering on their brows ; 
, Stung with remorse for broken vows ; 
Frantic — else how might they rejoice? 
And friendless, by their own sad choice ! 
Hail, Bards of mightier grasp ! on you 
I chiefly call, the chosen Few, 
Who cast not off the acknowledged guide, 
Who faltered not, nor turned aside ; 
Whose lofty genius could survive 
Privation, under sorrow thrive ; 
In whom the fiery Muse revered 
The symbol of a snow-white beard, 
Bedewed with meditative tears 
Dropped from the lenient cloud of years. 
Brothers in soul ! though distant times 
i Produced you nursed in various climes, 
Ye, when the orb of life had waned, 
A plenitude of love retained : 
Hence, while in you each sad regret 
By corresponding hope was met, 
Ye lingered among human kind, 
Sweet voices for the passing wind ; 
Departing sunbeams, loth to stop, 
Though smiling on the last hill top ! 
Such to the tender-hearted maid 
Even ere her joys begin to fade ; 
Such, haply, to the rugged chief 
By fortune crushed, or tamed by grief; 
Appears, on Morven's lonely shore, 
Dim-gleaming through imperfect lore, 
The Son of Fingal ; such was blind 
Meeonides of ampler mind ; 
Such Milton, to the fountain head 
Of glory by Urania led ! 
 
XXVIII. 
CAVE OF STAFFA. 
e saw, but surely, in the motley crowd, 
It One of us has felt the far-famed sight ; 
,'w could we feel it ? each the other's blight, 
uried and hurrying, volatile and loud. 
'for those motions only that invite 
e Ghost of Fingal to his tuneful Cave 
I the breeze entered, and wave after wave 
: 'tly embosoming the timid light ! 
••'d by one Votary who at will might stand 
'■zing and take into his mind and heart, 
iith undistracted reverence, the effect 
I those proportions where the almighty hand 
at made the worlds, the sovereign Architect, 
 deigned to work as if with human Art ! 

XXIX. 
CAVE OF STAFFA. 
AFTER THE CROWD HAD DEPARTED. 
Thanks for the lessons of this Spot — fit school 
For the presumptuous thoughts that would assign 
Mechanic laws to agency divine ; 
And, measuring heaven by earth, would overrule 
Infinite Power. The pillared vestibule, 
Expanding yet precise, the roof embowed, 
Might seem designed to humble man, when proud 
Of his best workmanship by plan and tool. 
Down-bearing with his whole Atlantic weight 
Of tide and tempest on the Structure's base, 
And flashing to that Structure's topmost height, 
?ean has proved its strength, and of its grace 
In calms is conscious, finding for his freight 
Of softest music some responsive place. 

CAVE OF STAFFA. 
Ye shadowy Beings, that have rights and claims 
In every cell of Fingal's mystic Grot, 
Where are ye ? Driven or venturing to the spot, 
Our fathers glimpses caught of your thin Frames, 
And, by your mien and bearing, knew your names ; 
And they could hear Ms ghostly song who trod 
Earth, till the flesh lay on him like a load, 
While he struck his desolate harp without hopes or 
Vanished ye are, but subject to recal ; [aims. 
Why keep we else the instincts whose dread law 
Ruled here of yore, till what men felt they saw, 
Not by black arts but magic natural ! 
If eyes be still sworn vassals of belief, 
Yon light shapes forth a Bard, that shade a Chief. 

FLOWEES ON THE TOP OF THE PILLARS AT THE 
ENTRANCE OF THE CAVE. 
Hope smiled when your nativity was cast, 
Children of Summer ! Ye fresh Flowers that brave 
What Summer here escapes not, the fierce wave, 
And whole artillery of the western blast, 
Battering the Temple's front, its long-drawn nave 
Smiting, as if each moment were their last. 
But ye, bright Flowers, on frieze and architrave 
Survive, and once again the Pile stands fast : 
Calm as the Universe, from specular towers 
Of heaven contemplated by Spirits pure 
With mute astonishment, it stands sustained 
Through every part in symmetry, to endure, 
Unhurt, the assault of Time with all his hours, 
As the supreme Artificer ordained. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

IONA. 
On to Iona ! — What can she afford 
To us save matter for a thoughtful sigh, 
Heaved over ruin with stahility 
In urgent contrast ? To diffuse the Word 
(Thy Paramount, mighty Nature ! and Time's Lord) 
Her Temples rose, 'mid pagan gloom ; but why, 
Even for a moment, has our verse deplored 
Their wrongs, since they fulfilled their destiny \ 
And when, subjected to a common doom 
Of mutabihty, those far-famed Piles 
Shall disappear from both the sister Isles, 
Iona's Saints, forgetting not past days, 
Garlands shall wear of amaranthine bloom, 
While heaven's vast sea of voices chants their praise. 

IONA. 
(OPON LANDING.) 
How sad a welcome ! To each voyager 
Some ragged child holds up for sale a store 
Of wave-worn pebbles, pleading on the shore 
Where once came monk and nun with gentle stir, 
Blessings to give, news ask, or suit prefer. 
Yet is yon neat trim church a grateful speck 
Of novelty amid the sacred wreck 
Strewn far and wide. Think, proud Philosopher ! 
Fallen though she be, this Glory of the west, 
Still on her sons, the beams of mercy shine ; 
And ' hopes, perhaps more heavenly bright than 
A grace by thee unsought and unpossest, [thine, 
A faith more fixed, a rapture more divine 
Shall gild their passage to eternal rest.' 

THE BLACK STONES OF IONA. 
[See Martin's Voyage among the Western Isles.] 
Here on their knees men swore : the stones were 
black, 
Black in the people's minds and words, yet they 
Were at that time, as now, in colour grey. 
But what is colour, if upon the rack 
Of conscience souls are placed by deeds that lack 
Concord with oaths ? What differ night and day 
Then, when before the Perjured on his way 
Hell opens, and the heavens in vengeance crack 
Above his head uplifted in vain prayer 
To Saint, or Fiend, or to the Godhead whom 
He had insulted — Peasant, King, or Thane ? 
Fly where the culprit may, guilt meets a doom ; 
And, from invisible worlds at need laid bare, 
Come links for social order's awful chain. 

Homeward we tarn. Isle of Columba's Cell, 
Where Christian piety's soul-cheering spark 
(Kindled from Heaven between the light and dar 
Of time) shone like the morning-star, farewell !- 
And fare thee well, to Fancy visible, 
Remote St. Kilda, lone and loved sea-mark 
For many a voyage made in her swift bark, 
When with more hues than in the rainbow dwell 
Thou a mysterious intercourse dost hold, 
Extracting from clear skies and air serene, 
And out of sun-bright waves, a lucid veil, 
That thickens, spreads, and, mingling fold with id 
Makes known, when thou no longer canst be see 
Thy whereabout, to warn the approaching sail. 

xxxvi. 
GREENOCK. 
Per me si va nella Citta dolente. 
We have not passed into a doleful City, 
We who were led to-day down a grim dell, 
By some too boldly named ' the Jaws of Hell : ' 
Where be the wretched ones, the sights for pit} 
These crowded streets resound no plaintive ditty : 
As from the hive where bees in summer dwell, 
Sorrow seems here excluded ; and that knell, 
It neither damps the gay, nor checks the witty. 
Alas ! too busy Rival of old Tyre, [throne 
Whose merchants Princes were, whose decks we 
Soon may the punctual sea in vain respire 
To serve thy need, in union with that Clyde 
Whose nursling current brawls o'er mossy ston-. 
The poor, the lonely, herdsman's joy and pride. 

" There !" said a Stripling, pointing with meet pri 
Towards a low roof with green trees half conceal 
" Is Mosgiel Farm ; and that 's the very field 
Where Burns ploughed up the Daisy." Far a 
wide 
A plain below stretched seaward, while, descrif 
Above sea-clouds, the Peaks of Arran ros? ; 
And, by that simple notice, the repose 
Of earth, sky, sea, and air, was vivified. 
Beneath < the random bield of clod or stone ' 
Myriads of daisies have shone forth in flower 
Near the lark's nest, and in their natural hour 
Have passed away ; less happy than the One 
That, by the unwilling ploughshare, died to pre 
The tender charm of poetry and love. 

SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 


THE RIVER EDEN, CUMBERLAND. 
den ! till now thy beauty had I viewed 
y glimpses only, and confess with shame 
hat verse of mine, whate'er its varying mood, 
epeats but once the sound of thy sweet name : 
et fetched from Paradise that honour came, 
ightfully borne ; for Nature gives thee flowers 
feat have no rivals among British bowers ; 
; nd thy bold rocks are worthy of their fame. 
Measuring thy course, fair Stream ! at length I pay 
p my life's neighbour dues of neighbourhood ; 
ut I have traced thee on thy winding way 
T ith pleasure sometimes by this thought restrained 
r things far off we toil, while many a good 
ot sought, because too near, is never gained. 

MONUMENT OF MRS. HOWARD, 
(by Nollekens,) 
WETHERAL CHURCH, NEAR CORBY, ON THE BANKS OF 
THE EDEN. 
retched on the dying Mother's lap, lies dead 
;er new-born Babe ; dire ending of bright hope ! 
at Sculpture here, with the divinest scope 
'luminous faith, heavenward hath raised that head 
.> patiently ; and through one hand has spread 
touch so tender for the insensate Child — 
larth's lingering love to parting reconciled, 
Kef parting, for the spirit is all but fled) — 
lat we, who contemplate the turns of life 
jirough this still medium, are consoled and cheered ; 
'^el with the Mother, think the severed Wife 
, less to be lamented than revered ; 
id own that Art, triumphant over strife 
pain, hath powers to Eternity endeared. 

suggested by the foregoing, 
ianquillity ! the sovereign aim wert thou 
; heathen schools of philosophic lore ; 
sart-stricken by stern destiny of yore 
tie Tragic Muse thee served with thoughtful vow ; 
id what of hope Elysium could allow 
as fondly seized by Sculpture, to restore 
.■ace to the Mourner. But when He who wore 
le crown of thorns around his bleeding brow 
armed our sad being with celestial light, 
| en. Arts which still had drawn a softening grace 
i'om shadowy fountains of the Infinite, 
^mmuned with that Idea face to face : 
id move around it now as planets run, 
tch in its orbit round the central Sun. 

NUNNERY. 
The floods are roused, and will not soon be weary ; 
Down from the Pennine Alps how fiercely sweeps 
Croglin, the stately Eden's tributary ! 
He raves, or through some moody passage creeps 
Plotting new mischief — out again he leaps 
Into broad light, and sends, through regions airy, 
That voice which soothed the Nuns while on the 
steeps 
They knelt in prayer, or sang to blissful Mary. 
That union ceased : then, cleaving easy walks 
Through crags, and smoothing paths beset with 
danger, 
Came studious Taste; and many a pensive stranger 
Dreams on the banks, and to the river talks. 
What change shall happen next to Nunnery Dell ? 
Canal, and Viaduct, and Railway, tell ! 

STEAMBOATS, VIADUCTS, AND RAILWAYS. 
Motions and Means, on land and sea at war 
With old poetic feeling, not for this, 
Shall ye, by Poets even, be judged amiss ! 
Nor shall your presence, howsoe'er it mar 
The loveliness of Nature, prove a bar 
To the Mind's gaining that prophetic sense 
Of future change, that point of vision, whence 
May be discovered what in soul ye are. 
In spite of all that beauty may disown 
In your harsh features, Nature doth embrace 
Her lawful offspring in Man's art ; and Time, 
Pleased with your triumphs o'er his brother Space, 
Accepts from your bold hands the proffered crown 
Of hope, and smiles on you with cheer sublime. 

THE MONUMENT COMMONLY CALLED LONG MEG AND HER 
DAUGHTERS, NEAR THE RIVER EDEN. 
A weight of awe, not easy to be borne, 
Fell suddenly upon my Spirit — cast 
From the dread bosom of the unknown past, 
When first I saw that family forlorn. 
Speak Thou, whose massy strength and stature scorn 
The power of years — pre-eminent, and placed 
Apart, to overlook the circle vast — 
Speak, Giant-mother ! tell it to the Morn 
While she dispels the cumbrous shades of Night ; 
Let the Moon hear, emerging from a cloud ; 
At whose behest uprose on British ground 
That Sisterhood, in hieroglyphic round 
Forth-shadowing, some have deemed, the infinite 
The inviolable God, that tames the proud f ! 

 The chain of Crossfell. 

f See Note. 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION, 

XLIV. 
LOWTHER. 
Lowther ! in thy majestic Pile are seen 
Cathedral pomp and grace, in apt accord 
With the baronial castle's sterner mien ; 
Union significant of God adored, 
And charters won and guarded by the sword 
Of ancient honour ; whence that goodly state 
Of polity which wise men venerate, 
And will maintain, if God his help afford. 
Hourly the democratic torrent swells ; 
For airy promises and hopes suborned [scorned. 
The strength of backward-looking thoughts is 
Fall if ye must, ye Towers and Pinnacles, 
With what ye symbolise ; authentic Story 
Will say, Ye disappeared with England's Glory ! 


TO THE EARL OF LONSDALE. 
' Magistratus indicat virum.' 
Lonsdale ! it were unworthy of a Guest, 
Whose heart with gratitude to thee inclines, 
If he should speak, by fancy touched, of signs 
On thy Abode harmoniously imprest, 
Yet be unmoved with wishes to attest 
How in thy mind and moral frame agree 
Fortitude, and that Christian Charity 
Which, filling, consecrates the human breast. 
And if the Motto on thy 'scutcheon teach 
With truth, ' The Magistracy shows the Man ;' 
That searching test thy public course has stood ; 
As will be owned alike by bad and good, 
Soon as the measuring of life's little span 
Shall place thy virtues out of Envy's reach. 

THE SOMNAMBULIST. 
List, ye who pass by Lyulph's Tower 
At eve ; how softly then 
Doth Aira-force, that torrent hoarse, 
Speak from the woody glen ! 
Fit music for a solemn vale ! 
And holier seems the ground 
To him who catches on the gale 
The spirit of a mournful tale, 
Embodied in the sound. 

 See Note. 
t A pleasure-house built by the late Duke of Norfolk 
upon the banks of Ullswater. Force is the word used in 
the Lake District for Water-fall. 

Not far from that fair site whereon 
The Pleasure-house is reared, 
As story says, in antique days 
A stern-brow'd house appeared ; 
Foil to a Jewel rich in light 
There set, and guarded well ; 
Cage for a Bird of plumage bright, 
Sweet-voiced, nor wishing for a flight 
Beyond her native dell. 
To win this bright Bird from her cage, 
To make this Gem their own, 
Came Barons bold, with store of gold, 
And Knights of high renown ; 
But one She prized, and only one ; 
Sir Eglamore was he ; 
Full happy season, when was known, 
Ye Dales and Hills ! to you alone 
Their mutual loyalty — 
Known chiefly, Aira ! to thy glen, 
Thy brook, and bowers of holly ; 
Where Passion caught what Nature taught, 
That all but love is folly ; 
Where Fact with Fancy stooped to play ; 
Doubt came not, nor regret — 
To trouble hours that winged their way, 
As if through an immortal day 
Whose sun could never set. 
But in old times Love dwelt not long 
Sequester' d with repose ; 
Best throve the fire of chaste desire, 
Fanned by the breath of foes. 
" A conquering lance is beauty's test, 
(C And proves the Lover true ;" 
So spake Sir Eglamore, and pressed 
The drooping Emma to his breast, 
And looked a blind adieu. 


They parted. — Well with him it fared 
Through wide-spread regions errant ; 
A knight of proof in love's behoof, 
The thirst of fame his warrant : 
And She her happiness can build 
On woman's quiet hours ; 
Though faint, compared with spear and 
The solace beads and masses yield, 
And needlewoi'k and flowers. 

Yet blest was Emma when she heard 
Her Champion's praise recounted ; 
Though brain would swim, and eyes grow i 
And high her blushes mounted ; 

SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR, . 

 

Or when a bold heroic lay 
She warbled from full heart ; 
Delightful blossoms for the May 
Of absence ! but they will not stay, 
Born only to depart. 
Hope wanes with her, while lustre fills 
Whatever path he chooses ; 
As if his orb, that owns no curb, 
Received the light hers loses. 
He comes not back ; an ampler space 
Requires for nobler deeds ; 
He ranges on from place to place, 
Till of his doings is no trace, 
But what her fancy breeds. 
His fame may spread, but in the past 
Her spirit finds its centre ; 
; Clear sight She has of what he was, 
And that would now content her. 
" Still is he my devoted Knight ?" 
! The tear in answer flows ; 
iMonth falls on month with heavier weight ; 
iDay sickens round her, and the night 
Is empty of repose. 
In sleep She sometimes walked abroad, 
I Deep sighs with quick words blending, 
'Like that pale Queen whose hands are seen 
.' With fancied spots contending ; 
jBut she is innocent of blood, — 
i The moon is not more pure 
That shines aloft, while through the wood 
(She thrids her way, the sounding Flood 
Her melancholy lure ! 
While 'mid the fern-brake sleeps the doe, 
And owls alone are waking, 
'In white arrayed, glides on the Maid 
' The downward pathway taking, 
That leads her to the torrent's side 
j And to a holly bower ; 
By whom on this still night descried ? 
By whom in that lone place espied ? 
I By thee, Sir Eglamore ! 
A wandering Ghost, so thinks the Knight, 
! His coming step has thwarted, 
Beneath the boughs that heard their vows, 
| Within whose shade they parted. 
Hush, hush, the busy Sleeper see ! 
j Perplexed her fingers seem, 
As if they from the holly tree 
Green twigs would pluck, as rapidly 
Flung from her to the stream. 

What means the Spectre ? Why intent 
To violate the Tree, 
Thought Eglamore, by which I swore 
Unfading constancy ? 
Here am I, and to-morrow's sun, 
To her I left, shall prove 
That bliss is ne'er so surely won 
As when a circuit has been run 
Of valour, truth, and love. 
So from the spot whereon he stood, 
He moved with stealthy pace ; 
And, drawing nigh, with his living eye, 
He recognised the face ; 
And whispers caught, and speeches small, 
Some to the green-leaved tree, 
Some muttered to the torrent-fall ; — 
" Roar on, and bring him with thy call ; 
" I heard, and so may He !" 
Soul-shattered was the Knight, nor knew 
If Emma's Ghost it were, 
Or boding Shade, or if the Maid 
Her very self stood there. 
He touched ; what followed who shall tell ? 
The soft touch snapped the thread 
Of slumber — shrieking back she fell, 
And the Stream whirled her down the dell 
Along its foaming bed. 
In plunged the Knight ! — when on firm ground 
The rescued Maiden lay, 
Her eyes grew bright with blissful light, 
Confusion passed away ; 
She heard, ere to the throne of grace 
Her faithful Spirit flew, 
His voice — beheld his speaking face ; 
And, dying, from his own embrace, 
She felt that he was true. 
So was he reconciled to life : 
Brief words may speak the rest ; 
Within the dell he built a cell, 
And there was Sorrow's guest ; 
In hermits' weeds repose he found, 
From vain temptations free ; 
Beside the torrent dwelling — bound 
By one deep heart-controlling sound, 
And awed to piety. 
Wild stream of Aira, hold thy course, 
Nor fear memorial lays, 
Where clouds that spread in solemn shade, 
Are edged with golden rays ! 

 

POEMS OF THE IMAGINATION. 

Dear art thou to the light of heaven, 
Though minister of sorrow ; 
Sweet is thy voice at pensive even ; 
And thou, in lovers' hearts forgiven, 
Shalt take thy place with Yarrow ! 

TO CORDELIA M- 

HALLSTEADS, ULLSWATER. 
Not in the mines beyond the western main, 
You say, Cordelia, was the metal sought, 
Which a fine skill, of Indian growth, has wrought 
Into this flexible yet faithful Chain ; 
Nor is it silver of romantic Spain 
Butfrom our loved Helvellyn's depths was brought, 
Our own domestic mountain. Thing and thought 
Mix strangely ; trifles light, and partly vain, 
Can prop, as you have learnt, our nobler being : 
Yes, Lady, while about your neck is wound 

(Your casual glance oft meeting) this bright cord 
What witchery, for pure gifts of inward seeing, 
Lurks in it, Memory's Helper, Fancy's Lord, 
For precious tremblings in your bosom found ! 

Most sweet it is with unuplifted eyes 
To pace the ground, if path be there or none, 
While a fair region round the traveller lies 
Which he forbears again to look upon ; 
Pleased rather with some soft ideal scene, 
The work of Fancy, or some happy tone 
Of meditation, slipping in between 
The beauty coming and the beauty gone. 
If Thought and Love desert us, from that day 
Let us break off all commerce with the Muse : 
With Thought and Love companions of our way, 
Whate'er the senses take or may refuse, 
The Mind's internal heaven shall shed her dews 
Of inspiration on the humblest lay. 




POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

EXPOSTULATION AND REPLY. 
" Why, William, on that old grey stone, 
Thus for the length of half a day, 
Why, William, sit you thus alone, 
And dream your time away ? 
Where are your books ? — that light bequeathed 
To Beings else forlorn and blind ! 
Up ! up ! and drink the spirit breathed 
From dead men to their kind. 
You look round on your Mother Earth, 
As if she for no purpose bore you ; 
As if you were her first-born birth, 
id none had lived before you !" 

An, 

One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake, 
When life was sweet, I knew not why, 
'To me my good friend Matthew spake, 
;And thus I made reply. 
'" The eye — it cannot choose but see ; 
We cannot bid the ear be still ; 
Our bodies feel, where'er they be, 
Against or with our will. 
Nor less I deem that there are Powers 
Which of themselves our minds impress ; 
That we can feed this mind of ours 
In a wise passiveness. 

'hink you, 'mid all this mighty sum 
Of things for ever speaking, 
That nothing of itself will come, 
But we must still be seeking? 
— Then ask not wherefore, here, alone, 
Conversing as I may, 
I sit upon this old grey stone, 
And dream my time away." 

. 

a. 

THE TABLES TURNED. 
AN EVENING SCENE ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
Up ! up ! my Friend, and quit your books ; 
Or surely you ' grow double : 
Up ! up ! my Friend, and clear your looks ; 
Why all this toil and trouble ? 
The sun, above the mountain's head, 
A freshening lustre mellow 
Through all the long green fields has spread, 
His first sweet evening yellow. 
Books ! 'tis a dull and endless strife : 
Come, hear the woodland linnet, 
How sweet his music ! on my life, 
There's more of wisdom in it. 
And hark ! how blithe the throstle sings ! 
He, too, is no mean preacher : 
Come forth into the light of things, 
Let Nature be your teacher. 
She has a world of ready wealth, 
Our minds and hearts to bless — 
Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, 
Truth breathed by cheerfulness. 
One impulse from a vernal wood 
May teach you more of man, 
Of moral evil and of good, 
Than all the sages can. 
Sweet is the lore which Nature brings ; 
Our meddling intellect 
Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things :— 
We murder to dissect. 
Enough of Science and of Art ; 
Close up those barren leaves ; 
Come forth, and bring with you a heart 
That watches and receives. 
. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING. 
I heard a thousand blended notes, 
While in a grove I sate reclined, 
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
Bring sad thoughts to the mind. 
To her fair works did Nature link 
The human soul that through me ran ; 
And much it grieved my heart to think 
What man has made of man. 
Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, 
The periwinkle trailed its wreaths ; 
And 'tis my faith that every flower 
Enjoys the air it breathes. 
The birds around me hopped and played, 
Their thoughts I cannot measure : — 
But the least motion which they made, 
It seemed a thrill of pleasure. 
The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
To catch the breezy air ; 
And I must think, do all I can, 
That there was pleasure there. 
If this belief from heaven be sent, 
If such be Nature's holy plan, 
Have I not reason to lament 
What man has made of man? 
. 

IV. 
A CHARACTER. 

E marvel how Nature could ever find space 
For so many strange contrasts in one human face : 
There 's thought and no thought, and there 's pale- 
ness and bloom 
And bustle and sluggishness, pleasure and gloom. 
There 's weakness, and strength both redundant 
and vain ; 
Such strength as, if ever affliction and pain 
Could pierce through a temper that 'ssoft to disease, 
Would be rational peace — a philosopher's ease. 
There's indifference, alike when he fails or succeeds, 
And attention full ten times as much as there needs ; 
Pride where there's no envy, there's so much of joy ; 
And mildness, and spirit both forward and coy. 

There 's freedom, and sometimes a diffident stare 
Of shame scarcely seeming to know that she 's there 
There's virtue, the title it surely may claim, 
Yet wants heaven knows what to be worthy the name 
This picture from nature may seem to depart, 
Yet the Man would at once run away with you: 
heart ; 
And I for five centuries right gladly would be 
Such an odd such a kind happy creature as he. 
laoo. 

TO MY SISTER. 

It is the first mild day of March : 
Each minute sweeter than before 
The redbreast sings from the tall larch 
That stands beside our door. 
There is a blessing in the air, 
Which seems a sense of joy to yield 
To the bare trees, and mountains bare, 
And grass in the green field. 
My sister ! ('tis a wish of mine) 
Now that our morning meal is done, 
Make haste, your morning task resign ; 
Come forth and feel the sun. 
Edward will come with you ; — and, pray, 
Put on with speed your woodland dress ; 
And bring no book : for this one day 
We ' give to idleness. 
No joyless forms shall regulate 
Our living calendar : 
We from to-day, my Friend, will date 
The opening of the year. 
Love, now a universal birth, 
From heart to heart is stealing, 
From earth to man, from man to earth : 
— It is the hour of feeling. 
One moment now may give us more 
Than years of toiling reason : 
Our minds shall drink at every pore 
The spirit of the season. 
Some silent laws our hearts will make, 
Which they shall long obey : 
We for the year to come may take 
Our temper from to-day. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. " 

And from the blessed power that rolls 

And he is lean and he is sick ; 

 About, below, above, 

His body, dwindled and awry, 

We'll frame the measure of our souls : 

Rests upon ankles swoln and thick ; 

They shall be tuned to love. 

His legs are thin and dry. 

■ 

One prop he has, and only one, 

Then come, my Sister ! come, I pray, 

His wife, an aged woman, 

With speed put on your woodland dress ; 

Lives with him, near the waterfall, 

And bring no book : for this one day 

Upon the village Common. 

We ' give to idleness. 


. 

Beside their moss-grown hut of clay, 


Not twenty paces from the door, 



A scrap of land they have, but they 

VI. • 

Are poorest of the poor. 


Tins scrap of land he from the heath 

SIMON LEE, 

Enclosed when he was stronger ; 


But what to them avails the land 

THE OLD HUNTSMAN ; 



Which he can till no longer ? 

WITH AN INCIDENT IN WHICH HE WAS CONCERNED. 


In the sweet shire of Cardigan, 

Oft, working by her Husband's side, 

Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall, 

Ruth does what Simon cannot do; 

!An old Man dwells, a little man, — 

For she, with scanty cause for pride, 

j'Tis said he once was tall. 

Is stouter of the two. 

IFull five-and-thirty years he lived 

And, though you with your utmost skill 

A running huntsman merry ; 

From labour could not wean them, 

And still the centre of his cheek 

'Tis little, very little — all 

Is red as a ripe cherry. 

That they can do between them. 

No man like him the horn could sound, 

Few months of life has he in store 

iA.nd hill and valley rang with glee 

As he to you will tell, 

iWhen Echo bandied, round and round, 

For still, the more he works, the more 

The halloo of Simon Lee. 

Do his weak ankles swell. 

'In those proud days, he little cared 

My gentle Reader, I perceive 

For husbandry or tillage ; 

How patiently you 've waited, 

To blither tasks did Simon rouse 

And now I fear that you expect 

The sleepers of the village. 

Some tale will be related. 

He all the country could outrun, 

Reader ! had you in your mind 

iCould leave both man and horse behind ; 

Such stores as silent thought can bring, 

And often, ere the chase was done, 

gentle Reader ! you would find 

He reeled, and was stone-blind. 

A tale in every thing. 

And still there 's something in the world 

What more I have to say is short, 

At which his heart rejoices ; 

And you must kindly take it : 

For when the chiming hounds are out, 

It is no tale ; but, should you think, 

He dearly loves their voices ! 

Perhaps a tale you ' make it. 

'But, oh the heavy change ! — bereft 

One summer-day I chanced to see 

! f health, strength, friends, and kindred, see ! 

This old Man doing all he could 

Old Simon to the world is left 

To unearth the root of an old tree, 

[in liveried poverty. 

A stump of rotten wood. 

jHis Master's dead, — and no one now 

The mattock tottered in his hand ; 

'Dwells in the Hall of Ivor ; 

So vain was his endeavour, 

,Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead ; 

That at the root of the old tree 

He is the sole survivor. 

He might have worked for ever. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

" You 're overtasked, good Simon Lee, 
Give me your tool," to him I said ; 
And at the word right gladly he 
Received my proffered aid. 
I struck, and with a single blow 
The tangled root I severed, 
At which the poor old Man so long 
And vainly had endeavoured. 
The tears into his eyes were brought, 
And thanks and praises seemed to run 
So fast out of his heart, I thought 
They never would have done. 
— I 've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds 
With coldness still returning ; 
Alas ! the gratitude of men 
Hath oftener left me mourning. 

. 

VII. 
WRITTEN IN GERMANY, 
ON ONE OF THE COLDEST DAYS OF THE CENTURY. 
The Reader must be apprised, that the Stoves in North- 
Germany generally have the impression of a galloping 
horse upon them, this being part of the Brunswick Arms. 
A plague on your languages, German and Norse ! 
Let me have the song of the kettle ; 
And the tongs and the poker, instead of that horse 
That gallops away with such fury and force 
On this dreary dull plate of black metal. 
See that Fly, — a disconsolate creature ! perhaps 
A child of the field or the grove ; 
And, sorrow for him ! the dull treacherous heat 
Has seduced the poor fool from his winter retreat, 
And he creeps to the edge of my stove. 
Alas ! how he fumbles about the domains 
Which this comfortless oven environ ! 
He cannot find out in what track he must crawl, 
Now back to the tiles, then in search of the wall, 
And now on the brink of the iron. 
Stock-still there he stands like a traveller bemazed: 
The best of his skill he has tried ; 
His feelers, methinks, I can see him put forth 
To the east and the west, to the south and the 
north ; 
But he finds neither guide-post nor guide. 

His spindles sink under him, foot, leg, and thigh ! 
His eyesight and hearing are lost ; 
Between life and death his blood freezes and thaws • 
And his two pretty pinions of blue dusky gauze 
Are glued to his sides by the frost. 
No brother, no mate has he near him — while I 
Can draw warmth from the cheek of my Love ; 
As blest and as glad, in this desolate gloom, 
As if green summer grass were thefloor of myroom 
And woodbines were hanging above. 
Yet, God is my witness, thou small helpless Tiling 
Thy life I would gladly sustain 
Till summer come up from the south, and witl 
crowds 
Of thy brethren a march thou should'st souni 
through the clouds. 
And back to the forests again ! 
/S. 

VIII. 
A POET'S EPITAPH. 

Art thou a Statist in the van 
Of public conflicts trained and bred ? 
— First learn to love one living man ; 
Then may'st thou think upon the dead. 
A Lawyer art thou ? — draw not nigh ! 
Go, carry to some fitter place 
The keenness of that practised eye, 
The hardness of that sallow face. 
Art thou a Man of purple cheer ? 
A rosy Man, right plump to see ? 
Approach ; yet, Doctor, not too near, 
This grave no cushion is for thee. 
Or art thou one of gallant pride. 
A Soldier and no man of chaff ? 
Welcome ! — but lay thy sword aside, 
And lean upon a peasant's staff. 
Physician art thou ? one, all eyes, 
Philosopher ! a fingering slave, 
One that would peep and botanize 
Upon his mother's grave ? 
Wrapt closely in thy sensual fleece, 
turn aside, — and take, I pray, 
That he below may rest in peace, 
Thy ever-dwindling soul, away  

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

A Moralist perchance appears ; 
Led, Heaven knows how ! to this poor sod : 
And he has neither eyes nor ears ; 
imself his world, and his own God ; 

One to whose smooth-rubbed soul can cling 
<$ov form, nor feeling, great or small ; 
A reasoning, self-sufficing thing, 
An intellectual All-in-all ! 
ijhut close the door ; press down the latch ; 
sleep in thy intellectual crust ; 
Sfor lose ten tickings of thy watch 
ear this unprofitable dust. 

But who is He, with modest looks, 
kni clad in homely russet brown  
e murmurs near the running brooks 
 music sweeter than their own. 
ile is retired as noontide dew, 
)r fountain in a noon-day grove ; 
Vnd you must love him, ere to you 
ie will seem worthy of your love. 
The outward shows of sky and earth, 
Df hill and valley, he has viewed ; 
ind impulses of deeper birth 
Have come to him in solitude. 
[n common things that round us lie 
Some random truths he can impart, — 
The harvest of a quiet eye 
Ehat broods and sleeps on his own heart, 
ut he is weak ; both Man and Boy, 
ath been an idler in the land ; 
Contented if he might enjoy 
[Che things which others understand. 
—Come hither in thy hour of strength ; 
oome, weak as is a breaking wave ! 
Here stretch thy body at full length ; 
)r build thy house upon this grave. 

TO THE DAISY. 

right Flower ! whose home is everywhere, 
old in maternal Nature's care, 
\.nd all the long year through the heir 
Of joj or sorrow. 

Methinks that there abides in thee 
Some concord with humanity, 
Given to no other flower I see 
The forest thorough ! 
Is it that Man is soon deprest ? 
A thoughtless Thing ! who, once unblest, 
Does little on his memory rest, 
Or on his reason, 
And Thou would'st teach him how to find 
A shelter under every wind, 
A hope for times that are unkind 
And every season ? 
Thou wander'st the wide world about, 
Uncheck'd by pride or scrupulous doubt, 
With friends to greet thee, or without, 
Yet pleased and willing ; 
Meek, yielding to the occasion's call, 
And all things suffering from all, 
Thy function apostolical 
In peace fulfilling. 

MATTHEW. 
In the School of is a tablet, on which are inscribed, 
in gilt letters, the Nanus of the several persons who have 
been School-masters there since the foundation of the 
School, with the time at which they entered upon and 
quitted their office. Opposite to one of those Names 
the Author wrote the following lines. 
If Nature, for a favourite child, 
In thee hath tempered so her clay, 
That every hour thy heart rims wild, 
Yet never once doth go astray, 
Read o'er these lines ; and then review 
This tablet, that thus humbly rears 
In such diversity of hue 
Its history of two hundred years. 
— When through this little wreck of fame, 
Cipher and syllable ! thine eye 
Has travelled down to Matthew's name, 
Pause with no common sympathy. 
And, if a sleeping tear should wake, 
Then be it neither checked nor stayed : 
For Matthew a request I make 
Which for himself he had not made. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

Poor Matthew, all his frolics o'er, 
Is silent as a standing pool ; 
Far from the chimney's merry roar, 
And inunnur of the village school. 
The sighs which Matthew heaved were sighs 
Of one tired out with fun and madness ; 
The tears which came to Matthew's eyes 
Were tears of light, the dew of gladness. 
Yet, sometimes, when the secret cup 
Of still and serious thought went round, 
It seemed as if he drank it up — 
He felt with spirit so profound. 
— Thou soul of God's hest earthly mould ! 
Thou happy Soul ! and can it be 
That these two words of glittering gold 
Are all that must remain of thee ? 

THE TWO APRIL MORNINGS. 
We walked along, while bright and red 
Uprose the morning sun ; 
And Matthew stopped, he looked, and said, 
« The will of God be done ! " 
A village schoolmaster was he, 
With hair of glittering grey ; 
As blithe a man as you could see 
On a spring holiday. 
And on that morning, through the grass, 
And by the steaming rills, 
We travelled merrily, to pass 
A day among the hills. 
" Our work," said I, "was well begun, 
Then, from thy breast what thought, 
Beneath so beautiful a sun, 
So sad a sigh has brought " 
A second time did Matthew stop ; 
And fixing still his eye 
L T pon the eastern mountain-top, 
To me he made reply : 
 Yon cloud with that long purple cleft 
Brings fresh into my mind 
A day like this which I have left 
Full thirty years behind. 

And just above yon slope of corn 
Such colours, and no other, 
Were in the sky, that April morn, 
Of this the very brother. 
With rod and line I sued the sport 
Which that sweet season gave, 
And, to the church-yard come, stopped short 
Beside my daughter's grave. 
Nine summers had she scarcely seen, 
The pride of all the vale ; 
And then she sang ; — she would have been 
A very nightingale. 
Six feet in earth my Emma lay ; 
And yet I loved her more, 
For so it seemed, than till that day 
I e'er had loved before. 
And, turning from her grave, I met, 
Beside the churchyard yew, 
A blooming Girl, whose hair was wet 
With points of morning dew. 
A basket on her head she bare ; 
Her brow was smooth and white : 
To see a child so very fair, 
It was a pure delight ! 
No fountain from its rocky cave 
E'er tripped with foot so free ; 
She seemed as happy as a ware 
That dances on the sea. 
There came from me a sigh of pain 
Which I could ill confine ; 
I looked at her, and looked again : 
And did not wish her mine !" 
Matthew is in his grave, yet now, 
Methinks, I see him stand, 
As at that moment, with a bough 
Of wilding in his hand. 

XII. 
THE FOUNTAIN. 
A COXVEKSATIOS. 


We talked with open heart, and tongue 
Affectionate and true, 
A pair of friends, though I was young, 
And Matthew seventv-two. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

We lay beneath a spreading oak, 
Beside a mossy seat ; 
And from the turf a fountain broke, 
And gurgled at our feet. 
" Now, Matthew ! " said I, "let us match 
This water's pleasant tune 
With some old border-song, or catch 
That suits a summer's noon ; 
Or of the church-clock and the chimes 
Sing here beneath the shade, 
That half-mad thing of witty rhymes 
Which you last April made ! " 
[n silence Matthew lay, and eyed 
The spring beneath the tree ; 
Ind thus the dear old Man replied, 
Che grey-haired man of glee : 
•'No check, no stay, this Streamlet fears ; 
low merrily it goes ! 
Twill murmur on a thousand years, 
hid flow as now it flows. 
Lnd here, on this delightful day, 
cannot choose but think 
low oft, a vigorous man, I lay 
Jeside this fountain's brink. 
■Iy eyes are dim with childish tears, 
■ly heart is idly stirred, 
? or the same sound is in my ears 
Vhich in those days I heard. 
lus fares it still in our decay : 
Lnd yet the wiser mind 
ilourns less for what age takes away 
'ban what it leaves behind. 

le blackbird amid leafy trees, 
Tie lark above the hill, 
^et loose their carols when they 
ire quiet when they will. 
Vith Nature never do they wage 
i. foolish strife ; they see 
l happy youth, and their old age 
s beautiful and free : 

put we are pressed by heavy laws ; 
V.nd often, glad no more, 
'Ve wear a face of joy, because 
j-Ve have been glad of yore. 

If there be one who need bemoan 
His kindred laid in earth, 
The household hearts that were his own 
It is the man of mirth. 
My days, my Friend, are almost gone, 
My life has been approved, 
And many love me ; but by none 
Am I enough beloved." 
" Now both himself and me he wrongs, 
The man who thus complains ! 
I live and sing my idle songs 
Upon these happy plains ; 
And, Matthew, for thy children dead 
I ' be a son to thee ! " 
At this he grasped my hand, and said, 
" Alas ! that cannot be." 
We rose up from the fountain-side ; 
And down the smooth descent 
Of the green sheep-track did we glide ; 
And through the wood we went ; 
And, ere we came to Leonard's rock, 
He sang those witty rhymes 
About the crazy old church-clock, 
And the bewildered chimes. 

. 

PERSONAL TALK. 

I am not One who much or oft delight 
To season my fireside with personal talk, — 
Of friends, who live within an easy walk, 
Or neighbours, daily, weekly, in my sight : 
And, for my chance-acquaintance, ladies bright, 
Sons, mothers, maidens withering on the stalk, 
These all wear out of me, like Forms, with chalk 
Painted on rich men's floors, for one feast-night. 
Better than such discourse doth silence long, 
Long, barren silence, square with my desire ; 
To sit without emotion, hope, or aim, 
In the loved presence of my cottage-fire, 
And listen to the flapping of the flame, 
Or kettle whispering its faint undersong. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

" Yet life," you say, "is life ; we have seen and see, 
And with a living pleasure we describe ; 
And fits of sprightly malice do but bribe 
The languid mind into activity. 
Sound sense, and love itself, and mirth and glee 
Are fostered by the comment and the gibe." 
Even be it so : yet still among your tribe, 
Our daily world's true Worldlings, rank not me ! 
Children are blest, and powerful ; their world lies 
More justly balanced ; partly at their feet, 
And part far from them : — sweetest melodies 
Are those that are by distance made more sweet ; 
Whose mind is but the mind of his own eyes, 
He is a Slave ; the meanest we can meet ! 

Wings have we, — and as far as we can go 
We may find pleasure : wilderness and wood, 
Blank ocean and mere sky, support that mood 
Which with the lofty sanctifies the low. 
Dreams, books, are each a world ; and books, we 
know, 
Are a substantial world, both pure and good : 
Round these, with tendrils strong as flesh and blood, 
Our pastime and our happiness will grow. 
There find I personal themes, a plenteous store, 
Matter wherein right voluble I am, 
To which I listen with a ready ear ; 
Two shall be named, pre-eminently dear, — 
The gentle Lady married to the Moor ; 
And heavenly Una with her milk-white Lamb. 

Nor can I not believe but that hereby 
Great gains are mine ; for thus I live remote 
From evil-speaking ; rancour, never sought, 
Comes to me not ; malignant truth, or he. 
Hence have I genial seasons, hence have I 
Smooth passions, smooth discourse, and joyous 
thought : 
And thus from day to day my little boat 
Rocks in its harbour, lodging peaceably. 
Blessings be with them — and eternal praise, 
Who gave us nobler loves, and nobler cares — 
The Poets, who on earth have made us heirs 
Of truth and pure delight by heavenly lays ! 
Oh ! might my name be numbered among theirs, 
Then gladly would I end my mortal days. 

TO THE SPADE OF A FRIEND. 
(an agriculturist.) 
COMPOSED WHILE WE WEKE LABOURING TOGETHER IX 
HIS PLEASUKE-GBOUND. 
Spade ! with which Wilkinson hath tilled his lands 
And shaped these pleasant walks by Emont'i jiJ 
Thou art a tool of honour in my hands ; 
I press thee, through the yielding soil, with pride 

Rare master has it been thy lot to know ; 
Long hast Thou served a man to reason true ; 
Whose life combines the best of high and low, 
The labouring many and the resting few ; 
Health, meekness, ardour, quietness secure, 
And industry of body and of mind ; 
And elegant enjoyments, that are pure 
As nature is ; — too pure to be refined. 
Here often hast Thou heard the Poet sing 
In concord with his river murmuring by ; 
Or in some silent field, while timid spring 
Is yet uncheered by other minstrelsy. 
Who shall inherit Thee when death has laid 
Low in the darksome cell thine own dear lord! 
That man will have a trophy, humble Spade ! 
A trophy nobler than a conqueror's sword. 
If he be one that feels, with skill to part 
False praise from true, or, greater from the less 
Thee will he welcome to his hand and heart) 
Thou monument of peaceful happiness ! 
He will not dread with Thee a toilsome da;; - 
Thee his loved servant, his inspiring mate ! 
And, when thou art past service, worn away, 
No dull oblivious nook shall hide thy fate. 
His thrift thy uselessness will never scorn ; 
An heir-loom in his cottage wilt thou be : — 
High will he hang thee up, well pleased to ador 
His rustic chimney with the last of Thee ! 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

xv. 
A NIGHT THOUGHT. 
Lo ! where the Moon along the sky 
Sails with her happy destiny ; 
Oft is she hid from mortal eye 
Or dimly seen, 
But when the clouds asunder fly 
How bright her mien ! 
Far different we — a froward race, 
Thousands though rich in Fortune's grace 
With cherished sullemiess of pace 
Their way pursue, 
Ingrates who wear a smileless face 
The whole year through. 
If kindred humours e'er would make 
My spirit droop for drooping's sake, 
From Fancy following in thy wake, 
Bright ship of heaven ! 
A counter impulse let me take 
And be forgiven. 

XVI. 
INCIDENT 
CHARACTERISTIC OF A FAVOURITE DOO. 
' his morning rounds the Master 
les to learn how ail things fare ; 
i irches pasture after pasture, 
feep and cattle eyes with care ; 
j id, for silence or for talk, 
I hath comrades in his walk ; 
lar dogs, each pair of different breed, 
lj tinguished two for scent, and two for speed. 
I a hare before him started ! 
-;)ff they fly in earnest chase ; 
I;iry dog is eager-hearted, 
I the four are in the race : 
H the hare whom they pursue, 
Bowa from instinct what to do ; 
Er hope is near : no turn she makes ; 
ft, like an arrow, to the river takes. 
I -p the river was, and crusted 
I nly by a one night's frost ; 
Uj the nimble Hare hath trusted 
Ijthe ice, and safely crost ; 
I hath crost, and without heed 
Aare following at full speed, 
^en, lo ! the ice, so thinly spread, 
JJ aks — and the greyhound, Dart, is over-head ! 

Better fate have Prince and Swallow— 
See them cleaving to the sport ! 
Music has no heart to follow, 
Little Music, she stops short. 
She hath neither wish nor heart, 
Hers is now another part : 
A loving creature she, and brave ! 
And fondly strives her struggling friend to save. 
From the brink her paws she stretches, 
Very hands as you would say ! 
And afflicting moans she fetches, 
As he breaks the ice away. 
For herself she hath no fears, — 
Him alone she sees and hears, — 
Makes efforts with complainings ; nor gives o'er 
Until her fellow sinks to re-appear no more. 
. 

XVII. 
TRIBUTE 
TO TEE MEMORY OF THE SAME DOG. 
Lie here, without a record of thy worth, 
Beneath a covering of the common earth ! 
It is not from unwillingness to praise, 
Or want of love, that here no Stone we raise ; 
More thou deserv'st ; but this man gives to man, 
Brother to brother, this is all we can. 
Yet they to whom thy virtues made thee dear 
Shall find thee through all changes of the year : 
This Oak points out thy grave ; the silent tree 
Will gladly stand a monument of thee. 
We grieved for thee, and wished thy end were 
past ; 
And willingly have laid thee here at last : 
For thou hadst lived till every thing that cheers 
In thee had yielded to the weight of years ; 
Extreme old age had wasted thee away, 
And left thee but a glimmering of the day ; 
Thy ears were deaf, and feeble were thy knees, — 
I saw thee stagger in the summer breeze, 
Too weak to stand against its sportive breath, 
And ready for the gentlest stroke of death. 
It came, and we were glad ; yet tears were shed ; 
Both man and woman wept when thou wert dead ; 
Not only for a thousand thoughts that were, 
Old household thoughts, in which thou hadst thy 
share ; 
But for some precious boons vouchsafed to thee, 
Found scarcely any where in like degree ! 
For love, that comes wherever life and sense 
Are given by God, in thee was most intense ; 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

A chain of heart, a feeling of the mind, 
A tender sympathy, which did thee bind 
Not only to us Men, but to thy Kind : 
Yea, for thy fellow-brutes in thee we saw 
A soul of love, love's intellectual law : — 
Hence, if we wept, it was not done in shame ; 
Our tears from passion and from reason came, 
And, therefore, shalt thou be an honoured name ! 
. 

FIDELITY. 

A barking sound the Shepherd hears, 
A cry as of a dog or fox ; 
He halts — and searches with his eyes 
Among the scattered rocks : 
And now at distance can discern 
A stirring in a brake of fern ; 
And instantly a dog is seen, 
Glancing through that covert green. 
The Dog is not of mountain breed ; 
Its motions, too, are wild and shy ; 
With something, as the Shepherd thinks, 
Unusual in its cry : 
Nor is there any one in sight 
All round, in hollow or on height ; 
Nor shout, nor whistle strikes his ear ; 
What is the creature doing here  
It was a cove, a huge recess, 
That keeps, till June, December's snow ; 
A lofty precipice in front, 
A silent tarn below ! 
Far in the bosom of Helvellyn, 
Remote from public road or dwelling, 
Pathway, or cultivated land ; 
From trace of human foot or hand. 
There sometimes doth a leaping fish 
Send through the tarn a lonely cheer ; 
The crags repeat the raven's croak, 
In symphony austere; 
Thither the rainbow comes — the cloud — 
And mists that spread the flying shroud ; 
And sunbeams ; and the sounding blast, 
That, if it could, would hurry past ; 
But that enormous barrier holds it fast. 


Not free from boding thoughts, a while 
The Shepherd stood ; then makes his way 
O'er rocks and stones, following the Dog 
As quickly as he may ; 
Nor far had gone before he found 
A human skeleton on the ground ; 
The appalled Discoverer with a sigh 
Looks round, to learn the history. 
From those abrupt and perilous rocks 
The Man had fallen, that place of fear ! 
At length upon the Shepherd's mind 
It breaks, and all is clear : 
He instantly recalled the name, 
And who he was, and whence he came ; 
Remembered, too, the very day 
On which the Traveller passed this way. 
But hear a wonder, for whose sake 
This lamentable tale I tell ! 
A lasting monument of words 
This wonder merits well. 
The Dog, which still was hovering nigh, 
Repeating the same timid cry, 
This Dog, had been through three months' space 
A dweller in that savage place. 
Yes, proof was plain that, since the day 
When this ill-fated Traveller died, 
The Dog had watched about the spot, 
Or by his master's side : 
How nourished here through such long time 
He knows, who gave that love sublime ; 
And gave that strength of feeling, great 
Above all human estimate ! 

ODE TO DUTY. 

 Tarn is a small Mere or Lake, mostly high up in the 
mountains. 

« Jam non consilio bonus, sed more e perductus, ul no 
tantum recte faeere possim, sed nisi recte facere no 
possim.' 
Stern Daughter of the Voice of God ! 
Duty ! if that name thou love 
Who art a light to guide, a rod 
To check the erring, and reprove ; 
Thou, who art victory and law 
When empty terrors overawe ; 
From vain temptations dost set free ; 
And cahn'st the weary strife of frail humanity ! 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

?here are who ask not if thine eye 
e on them ; who, in love and truth, 
Vhere no misgiving is, rely 
Ipon the genial sense of youth : 
Had Hearts ! without reproach or blot ; 
Wio do thy work, and know it not : 
|h ! if through confidence misplaced 
hey fail, thy saving arms, dread Power ! around 
them cast. 
srene will be our days and bright, 
nd happy will our nature be, 
lien love is an unerring light, 
nd joy its own security, 
nd they a blissful course may hold 
ven now, who, not unwisely bold, 
ve in the spirit of this creed ; 
et seek thy firm support, according to their need. 
loving freedom, and untried ; 
> sport of every random gust, 
jt being to myself a guide, 
 blindly have reposed my trust : 
{id oft, when in my heart was heard 
ly timely mandate, I deferred 
le task, in smoother walks to stray ; 
it thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may. 
rough no disturbance of my soul, 
 strong compunction in me wrought, 
upplicate for thy control ; 
t in the quietness of thought : 
: this unchartered freedom tires ; 
.el the weight of chance-desires : 
. ' hopes no more must change their name, 
- mg for a repose that ever is the same. 
! m Lawgiver ! yet thou dost wear 
'  Godhead's most benignant grace ; 
It know we any thing so fair 
>■ is the smile upon thy face : 
I wers laugh before thee on their beds 
i i fragrance in thy footing treads ; 
J )u dost preserve the stars from wrong ; 
± i the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are 
fresh and strong. 
• humbler functions, awful Power ! 
All thee: I myself commend 
l|.o thy guidance from this hour ; 
I let ray weakness have an end ! 
.Me unto me, made lowly wise, 
% spirit of self-sacrifice ; 
i % confidence of reason give ; 
{ l in the light of truth thy Bondman let me five ! 
. 

CHARACTER OF THE HAPPY WARRIOR. 
Who is the happy Warrior ? Who is he 
That every man in arms should wish to be ? 
— It is the generous Spirit, who, when brought 
Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought 
Upon the plan that pleased his boyish thought : 
Whose high endeavours are an inward light 
That makes the path before him always bright : 
Who, with a natural instinct to discern 
What knowledge can perform, is diligent to learn ; 
Abides by this resolve, and stops not there, 
But makes his moral being his prime care ; 
Who, doomed to go in company with Pain, 
And Fear, and Bloodshed, miserable train ! 
Turns his necessity to glorious gain ; 
In face of these doth exercise a power 
Which is our human nature's highest dower ; 
Controls them and subdues, transmutes, bereaves 
Of their bad influence, and their good receives : 
By objects, which might force the soul to abate 
Her feeling, rendered more compassionate ; 
Is placable — because occasions rise 
So often that demand such sacrifice ; 
More skilful in self-knowledge, even more pure, 
As tempted more ; more able to endure, 
As more exposed to suffering and distress ; 
Thence, also, more alive to tenderness. 
— "lis he whose law is reason ; who depends 
Upon that law as on the best of friends ; 
Whence, in a state where men are tempted still 
To evil for a guard against worse ill, 
And what in quality or act is best 
Doth seldom on a right foundation rest, 
He labours good on good to fix, and owes 
To virtue every triumph that he knows : 
— Who, if lie rise to station of command, 
Rises by open means ; and there will stand 
On honourable terms, or else retire, 
And in himself possess his own desire ; 
Who comprehends his trust, and to the same 
Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim ; 
And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait 
For wealth, or honours, or for worldly state ; 
Whom they must follow ; oil whose head must fall, 
Like showers of manna, if they come at all : 
Whose powers shed round him in the common strife, 
Or mild concerns of ordinary life, 
A constant influence, a peculiar grace ; 
But who, if he be called upon to face 
Some awful moment to which Heaven has joined 
Great issues, good or bad for human kind, 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

Is happy as a Lover ; and attired 
With sudden brightness, like a Man inspired ; 
And, through the heat of conflict, keeps the law 
In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw; 
Or if an unexpected call succeed, 
Come when it will, is equal to the need : 
— He who, though thus endued as with a sense 
And faculty for storm and turbulence, 
Is yet a Soul whose master-bias leans 
To homefelt pleasures and to gentle scenes ; 
Sweet images ! which, wheresoe'er he be, 
Are at his heart ; and such fidelity 
It is his darling passion to approve ; 
More brave for this, that he hath much to love :— 
'Tis, finally, the Man, who, lifted high, 
Conspicuous object in a Nation's eye, 
Or left unthought-of in obscurity, — 
Who, with a toward or untoward lot, 
Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not — 
Plays, in the many games of life, that one 
Where what he most doth value must be won : 
Whom neither shape of danger can dismay, 
Nor thought of tender happiness betray ; 
Who, not content that former worth stand fast, 
Looks forward, persevering to the last, 
From well to better, daily self-surpast : 
Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth 
For ever, and to noble deeds give birth, 
Or he must fall, to sleep without his fame, 
And leave a dead unprofitable name — 
Finds comfort in himself and in his cause ; 
And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws 
His breath in confidence of Heaven's applause : 
This is the happy Warrior ; this is He 
That every Man in arms should wish to be. 
. 

XXI. 
THE FORCE OF PRAYER ; 
OR, 
THE FOUNDING OF BOLTON PRIORY. 
A TRADITION. 
" TOfjat te SU- for a hantlctte htm ? " 
With these dark words begins my Tale ; 
And their meaning is, whence can comfort spring 
When Prayer is of no avail ? 
" £I)at is QaaXs lav a hootlnte hmc?" 
The Falconer to the Lady said ; 
And she made answer " endless sorrow ! " 
For she knew that her Son was dead. 

 See the White Doe of Rylstone. 

She knew it by the Falconer's words, 
And from the look of the Falconer's eye ; 
And from the love which was in her soul 
For her youthful Romilly. 
— Young Romilly tlirough Barden woods 
Is ranging high and low ; 
And holds a greyhound in a leash, 
To let slip upon buck or doe. 
The pair have reached that fearful chasm, 
How tempting to bestride ! 
For lordly Wharf is there pent in 
With rocks on either side. 
This striding-place is called The Strid, 
A name which it took of yore : 
A thousand years hath it borne that name, 
And shall a thousand more. 
And hither is young Romilly come, 
And what may now forbid 
That he, perhaps for the hundredth time, 
Shall bound across The Strid ? 
He sprang in glee, — for what cared he 
That the river was strong, and the rocks we 
steep ?— 
But the greyhound in the leash hung back, 
And checked him in his leap. 
The Boy is in the arms of Wharf, 
And strangled by a merciless force ; 
For never more was young Romilly seen 
Till he rose a lifeless corse. 
Now there is stillness in the vale, 
And long, unspeaking, sorrow : 
Wharf shall be to pitying hearts 
A name more sad than Yarrow. 
If for a lover the Lady wept, 
A solace she might borrow 
From death, and from the passion of death ; 
Old Wharf might heal her sorrow. 
She weeps not for the wedding-day 
Which was to be to-morrow : 
Her hope was a further-looking hope, 
And hers is a mother's sorrow. 
He was a tree that stood alone, 
And proudly did its branches wave ; 
And the root of this delightful tree 
Was in her husband's grave ! 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

ong, long in darkness did she sit, ■ 
jnd her first words were, " Let there be 
L Bolton, on the field of Wharf, 
stately Priory ! " 
he stately Priory was reared ; 
i n d Wharf, as he moved along, 
a matins joined a mournful voice, 
or failed at even-song. 
•'nd the Lady prayed in heaviness 
hat looked not for relief ! 
ut slowly did her succour come, 
ad a patience to her grief. 
fci ! there is never sorrow of heart 
lat shall lack a timely end, 
but to God we turn, and ask 
: Him to be our friend t 

XXII. 
A FACT, AND AN IMAGINATION ; 
OB, 
ANUTE AND ALFRED, ON THE SEA-SHORE. 
ie Danish Conqueror, on his royal chair, 
; ustering a face of haughty sovereignty, 
i aid a covert purpose, cried — " O ye 
oproaching Waters of the deep, that share 
jith this green isle my fortunes, come not where 
jut Master's throne is set." — Deaf was the Sea ; 
;r waves rolled on, respecting his decree 
;ss than they heed a breath of wanton air. 
Then Canute, rising from the invaded throne, 
id to his servile Courtiers, — " Poor the reach, 
le undisguised extent, of mortal sway ! 
 only is a King, and he alone 
iiserves the name (this truth the billows preach) 
; hose everlasting laws, sea, earth, and heaven, 
obey." 
iThis just reproof the prosperous Dane 
pew from the influx of the main, 
•>r some whose rugged northern mouths would 
strain 
oriental flattery ; 
id Canute (fact more worthy to be known) 
om that time forth did for his brows disown 
ie ostentatious symbol of a crown ; 
teeming earthly royalty 
ntemptible as vain. 
Now hear what one of elder days, 
ch theme of England's fondest praise, 

Her darling Alfred, might have spoken ; 
To cheer the remnant of his host 
When he was driven from coast to coast, 
Distressed and harassed, but with mind unbroken : 
" My faithful followers, lo ! the tide is spent 
That rose, and steadily advanced to fill 
The shores and channels, working Nature's will 
Among the mazy streams that backward went, 
And in the sluggish pools where ships are pent : 
And now, his task performed, the flood stands still, 
At the green base of many an inland hill, 
In placid beauty and sublime content ! 
Such the repose that sage and hero find ; 
Such measured rest the sedulous and good 
Of humbler name ; whose souls do, like the flood 
Of Ocean, press right on ; or gently wind, 
Neither to be diverted nor withstood, 
Until they reach the bounds by Heaven assigned." 
. 

'A little onward lend thy guiding hand 
To these dark steps, a little further on/' 
— What trick of memory to my voice hath brought 
This mournful iteration ? For though Time, 
The Conqueror, crowns the Conquered, on this brow 
Planting his favourite silver diadem, 
Nor he, nor minister of his — intent 
To run before him, hath enrolled me yet, 
Though not unmenaced, among those who lean 
Upon a living staff, with borrowed sight. 
— O my own Dora, my beloved child !. 
Should that day come — but hark ! the birds salute 
The cheerful dawn, brightening for me the east; 
For me, thy natural leader, once again 
Impatient to conduct thee, not as erst 
A tottering infant, with compliant stoop 
From flower to flower supported ; but to curb 
Thy nymph-like step swift-bounding o'er the lawn. 
Along the loose rocks, or the slippery verge 
Of foaming torrents. — From thy orisons 
Come forth ; and, while the morning air is yet 
Transparent as the soul of innocent youth, 
Let me, thy happy guide, now point thy way, 
And now precede thee, winding to and fro, 
Till we by perseverance gain the top 
Of some smooth ridge, whose brink precipitous 
Kindles intense desire for powers withheld 
From this corporeal frame ; whereon who stands, 
Is seized with strong incitement to push forth 
His arms, as swimmers use, and plunge — dread 
thought, 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

For pastime plunge — into the ' abrupt abyss,' 
Where ravens spread their plumy vans, at ease ! 
And yet more gladly thee would I conduct 
Through woods and spacious forests, — to behold 
There, how the Original of human art, 
Heaven-prompted Nature, measures and erects 
Her temples, fearless for the stately work, 
Though waves, to every breeze, its high-arched roof, 
And storms the pillars rock. But we such schools 
Of reverential awe will chiefly seek 
In the still summer noon, while beams of light, 
Reposing here, and in the aisles beyond 
Traceably gliding through the dusk, recal 
To mind the living presences of nuns ; 
A gentle, pensive, white-robed sisterhood, 
Whose saintly radiance mitigates the gloom 
Of those terrestrial fabrics, where they serve, 
To Christ, the Sun of righteousness, espoused. 
Now also shall the page of classic lore, 
To these glad eyes from bondage freed,, again 
Lie open ; and the book of Holy Writ, 
Again unfolded, passage clear shall yield 
To heights more glorious still, and into shades 
More awful, where, advancing hand in hand, 
We may be taught, O Darling of my care ! 
To calm the affections, elevate the soul, 
And consecrate our lives to truth and love. 
. 

XXIV. 
ODE TO LYCORIS. 
May, . 
i. 
An age hath been when Earth was proud 
Of lustre too intense 
To be sustained ; and Mortals bowed 
The front in self-defence. 
Who then, if Dian's crescent gleamed, 
Or Cupid's sparkling arrow streamed 
While oh the wing the Urchin played, 
Could fearlessly approach the shade ? 
— Enough for one soft vernal day, 
If I, a bard of ebbing time, 
And nurtured in a fickle clime, 
May haunt this horned bay ; 
Whose amorous water multiplies 
The flitting halcyon's vivid dyes ; 
And smooths her liquid breast — to show 
These swan-like specks of mountain snow, 
White as the pair that slid along the plains 
Of heaven, when Venus held the reins ! 

In youth we love the darksome lawn 
Brushed by the owlet's wing ; 
Then, Twilight is preferred to Dawn, 
And Autumn to the Spring. 
Sad fancies do we then affect, 
In luxury of disrespect 
To our own prodigal excess 
Of too familiar happiness. 
Lycoris (if such name befit 
Thee, thee my life's celestial sign !) 
When Nature marks the year's decline, 
Be ours to welcome it ; 
Pleased with the harvest hope that runs 
Before the path of milder suns ; 
Pleased while the sylvan world displays 
Its ripeness to the feeding gaze ; 
Pleased when the sullen winds resound the kn 
Of the resplendent miracle. 
in. 
But something whispers to my heart 
That, as we downward tend, 
Lycoris ! life requires an art 
To which our souls must bend ; 
A skill — to balance and supply ; 
And, ere the flowing fount be dry, 
As soon it must, a sense to sip, 
Or drink, with no fastidious lip. 
Then welcome, above all, the Guest 
Whose smiles, diffused o'er land and sea, 
Seem to recal the Deity 
Of youth into the breast : 
May pensive Autumn ne'er present 
A claim to her disparagement ! 
While blossoms and the budding spray 
Inspire us in our own decay ; 
Still, as we nearer draw to life's dark gorJ, 
Be hopeful Spring the favourite of the Soul ! 

TO THE SAME. 

Enough of climbing toil ! — Ambition treads 
Here, as 'mid busier scenes, ground steep and rou 
Or slippery even to peril I and each step, 
As we for most uncertain recompence 
Mount toward the empire of the fickle clouds, 
Each weary step, dwarfing the world bciov;', 
Induces, for its old familiar sights, 
Unacceptable feelings of contempt, 
With wonder mixed— that Man could e'er be ti 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

anxious bondage, to such nice array- 
ed formal fellowship of petty things ! 
Oh ! 'tis the heart that magnifies this life, 
iking a truth and beauty of her own ; 
id moss-grown alleys, circumscribing shades, 
id gurgling rills, assist her in the work 
n-e efficaciously than realms outspread, 
in a map, before the adventurer's gaze — 
ean and Earth contending for regard. 
The umbrageous woods are left — how far beneath ! 
It lo! where darkness seems to guard the mouth 
i yon wild cave, whose jagged brows are fringed 
' th flaccid threads of ivy, in the still 
. d sultry air, depending motionless. 
t cool the space within, and not uncheered 
  whoso enters shall ere long perceive) 
I stealthy influx of the timid day 
JjUgling with night, such twilight to compose 
j Numa loved ; when, in the Egerian grot, 
j )m the sage Nymph appearing at his wish, 
j gained whate'er a regal mind might ask, 
( need, of counsel breathed through lips divine. 
ong as the heat shall rage, let that dim cave 
btect us, there deciphering as we may 
]|uvian records ; or the sighs of Earth 
lierpreting ; or counting for old Time 
ft minutes, by reiterated drops, 
i dible tears, from some invisible source 
'.jit deepens upon fancy — more and more 
] twn toward the centre whence those sighs creep 
r ,awe the lightness of humanity. [forth 
 shutting up thyself within thyself, 
. :re let me see thee sink into a mood 
(gentler thought, protracted till thine eye 
I calm as water when the winds are gone, 
ijd no one can tell whither. Dearest Friend ! 
too have known such happy hours together 
'lit, were power granted to replace them (fetched 
 >m out the pensive shadows where they lie) 
; the first warmth of their original sunshine, 
J h should I be to use it : passing sweet 
\ i the domains of tender memory ! 
- 

SEPTEMBER, . 
The sylvan slopes with corn-clad fields 
Are hung, as if with golden shields, 
Bright trophies of the sun ! 
Like a fair sister of the sky, 
Unruffled doth the blue lake he, 
The mountains looking on. 

And, sooth to say, yon vocal grove, 
Albeit uninspired by love, 
By love untaught to ring, 
May well afford to mortal ear 
An impulse more profoundly dear 
Than music of the Spring. 
For that from turbulence and heat 
Proceeds, from some uneasy seat 
In nature's struggling frame, 
Some region of impatient life : 
And jealousy, and quivering strife, 
Therein a portion claim. 
This, this is holy ; — while I hear 
These vespers of another year, 
This hymn of thanks and praise, 
My spirit seems to mount above 
The anxieties of human love, 
And earth's precarious days. 
But list ! — though winter storms be nigh, 
Unchecked is that soft harmony : 
There lives Who can provide 
For all his creatures ; and in Him, 
Even like the radiant Seraphim, 
These choristers confide. 

xxvu. 
UPON THE SAME OCCASION. 
Departing summer hath assumed 
An aspect tenderly illumed, 
The gentlest look of spring ; 
That calls from yonder leafy shade 
Unfaded, yet prepared to fade, 
A timely carolling. 
No faint and hesitating trill, 
Such tribute as to winter chill 
The lonely redbreast pays ! 
Clear, loud, and lively is the din, 
From social warblers gathering in 
Their harvest of sweet lays. 
Nor doth the example fail to cheer 
Me, conscious that my leaf is sere, 
And yellow on the bough : — 
Fall, rosy garlands, from my head ! 
Ye myrtle wreaths, your fragrance shed 
Around a younger brow ! 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

Yet will I temperately rejoice ; 
Wide is the range, and free the choice 
Of undiscordant themes ; 
Which, haply, kindred souls may prize 
Not less than vernal ecstasies, 
And passion's feverish dreams. 
For deathless powers to verse belong, 
And they like Demi-gods are strong 
On whom the Muses smile ; 
But some their function have disclaimed, 
Best pleased with what is aptliest framed 
To enervate and defile. 
Not such the initiatory strains 
Committed to the silent plains 
In Britain's earliest dawn : 
Trembled the groves, the stars grew pale, 
While all-too-daringly the veil 
Of nature was withdrawn ! 
Nov such the spirit-stirring note 
When the live chords Alcaeus smote, 
Inflamed by sense of wrong ; 
Woe ! woe to Tyrants ! from the lyre 
Broke threateningly, in sparkles dire 
Of fierce vindictive song. 
And not unhallowed was the page 
By winged Love inscribed, to assuage 
The pangs of vain pursuit ; 
Love listening while the Lesbian Maid 
With finest touch of passion swayed 
Her own iEolian lute. 
ye, who patiently explore 
The wreck of Herculanean lore, 
What rapture ! could ye seize 
Some Theban fragment, or unroll 
One precious, tender-hearted, scroll 
Of pure Simonides. 
That were, indeed, a genuine birth 
Of poesy ; a bursting forth 
Of genius from the dust : 
What Horace gloried to behold, 
What Maro loved, shall we enfold ? 
Can haughty Time be just ! 

xxvnr. 
MEMORY. 
A pen — to register ; a key — 
That winds through secret wards ; 
Are well assigned to Memory 
By allegoric Bards. 

As aptly, also, might be given 
A Pencil to her hand ; 
That, softening objects, sometimes even 
Outstrips the heart's demand ; 
That smoothes foregone distress, the lines 
Of lingering care subdues, 
Long- vanished happiness refines, 
And clothes in brighter hues ; 
Yet, like a tool of Fancy, works 
Those Spectres to dilate 
That startle Conscience, as she lurks 
Within her lonely seat. 
! that our lives, which flee so fast, 
In purity were such, 
That not an image of the past 
Should fear that pencil's touch ! 
Retirement then might hourly look 
Upon a soothing scene, 
Age steal to his allotted nook 
Contented and serene ; 
With heart as calm as lakes that sleep, 
In frosty moonlight glistening ; 
Or mountain rivers, where they creep 
Along a channel smooth and deep, 
To their own far-off murmurs listening. 

This Lawn, a carpet all alive 
With shadows flung from leaves — to strive 
In dance, amid a press 
Of sunshine, an apt emblem yields 
Of Worldlings revelling in the fields 
Of strenuous idleness ; 
Less quick the stir when tide and breeze 
Encounter, and to narrow seas 
Forbid a moment's rest ; 
The medley less when boreal Lights 
Glance to and fro, like aery Sprites 
To feats of arms addrest ! 
Yet, spite of all this eager strife, 
This ceaseless play, the genuine life 
That serves the stedfast hours, 
Is in the grass beneath, that grows 
Unheeded, and the mute repose 
Of sweetly-breathing flowers. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 


HUMANITY. 
[The Roclnng-tones, alluded to in the beginning of the 
following verses, are supposed to have been used, by our 
British ancestors, both for judicial and religious pur- 
poses. Such stones are not uncommonly found, at this 
day, both in Great Britain and in Ireland.] 
What though the Accused, upon his own appeal 
i To righteous Gods when man has ceased to feel, 
' Or at a doubting Judge's stern command, 
Before the Stone of Power no longer stand — 
To take his sentence from the balanced Block, 
As, at his touch, it rocks, or seems to rock ; 
Though, in the depths of sunless groves, no more 
The Druid-priest the hallowed Oak adore ; 
. Yet, for the Initiate, rocks and whispering trees 
i Do still perform mysterious offices ! 
And functions dwell in beast and bird that sway 
The reasoning mind, or with the fancy play, 
l Inviting, at all seasons, ears and eyes 
| To watch for undelusive auguries : — 
Not uninspired appear their simplest ways ; 
! Their voices mount symbolical of praise — 
; To mix with hymns that Spirits make and hear ; 
And to fallen man their innocence is dear. 
' Enraptured Art draws from those sacred springs 
Streams that reflect the poetry of things ! 
Where christian Martyrs stand in hues portrayed, 
I That, might a wish avail, would never fade, 
Borne in their hands the lily and the palm 
' Shed round the altar a celestial calm ; 
 There, too, behold the lamb and guileless dove 
Prest in the tenderness of virgin love 
To saintly bosoms ! — Glorious is the blending 
Of right affections climbing or descending 
■ Along a scale of light and life, with cares 
; Alternate ; carrying holy thoughts and prayers 
 Up to the sovereign seat of the Most High ; 
Descending to the worm in charity ; 
Like those good Angels whom a dream of night 
Gave, in the field of Luz, to Jacob's sight 
All, while he slept, treading the pendent stairs 
Earthward or heavenward, radiant messengers, 
That, with a perfect will in one accord 
i Of strict obedience, serve the Almighty Lord ; 
And with untired humility forbore 
To speed their errand by the wings they wore. 
What a fair world were ours for verse to paint, 
j If Power could live at ease with self-restraint ! 
: Opinion bow before the naked sense 
Of the great Vision, — faith in Providence ; 

Merciful over all his creatures, just 
To the least particle of sentient dust ; 
But, fixing by immutable decrees, 
Seedtime and harvest for his purposes ! 
Then would be closed the restless oblique eye 
That looks for evil like a treacherous spy ; 
Disputes would then relax, like stormy winds 
That into breezes sink ; impetuous minds 
By discipline endeavour to grow meek 
As Truth herself, whom they profess to seek. 
Then Genius, shunning fellowship with Pride, 
Would braid his golden locks at Wisdom's side ; 
Love ebb and flow untroubled by caprice ; 
And not alone harsh tyranny would cease, 
But unoffending creatures find release 
From qualified oppression, whose defence 
Rests on a hollow plea of recompence ; 
Thought-tempered wrongs, for each humane respect 
Oft worse to bear, or deadlier in effect. 
Witness those glances of indignant scorn 
From some high-minded Slave, impelled to spurn 
The kindness that would make him less forlorn ; 
Or, if the soul to bondage be subdued, 
His look of pitiable gratitude ! 
Alas for thee, bright Galaxy of Isles, 
Whose day departs in pomp, returns with smiles — 
To greet the flowers and fruitage of a land, 
As the sun mounts, by sea-born breezes fanned ; 
A land whose azure mountain-tops are seats 
For Gods in council, whose green vales, retreats 
Fit for the shades of heroes, mingling there 
To breathe Elysian peace in upper air. 
Though cold as winter, gloomy as the grave, 
Stone-walls a prisoner make, but not a slave. 
Shall man assume a property in man ? 
Lay on the moral will a withering ban \ 
Shame that our laws at distance still protect 
Enormities, which they at home reject ! 
' Slaves cannot breathe in England' — yet that 
boast 
Is but a mockery ! when from coast to coast, 
Though fettered slave be none, her floors and soil 
Groan underneath a weight of slavish toil, 
For the poor Many, measured out by rules 
Fetched with cupidity from heartless schools, 
That to an Idol, falsely called ' the Wealth 
Of Nations,' sacrifice a People's health, 
Body and mind and soul ; a thirst so keen 
Is ever urging on the vast machine 
Of sleepless Labour, 'mid whose dizzy wheels 
The Power least prized is that which thinks and 
feels. 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

Then, for the pastimes of this delicate age, 
And all the heavy or light vassalage 
Which for their sakes we fasten, as may suit 
Our varying moods, on human kind or brute, 
'Twere well in little, as in great, to pause, 
Lest Fancy trifle with eternal laws. 
Not from his fellows only man may learn 
Rights to compare and duties to discern ! 
All creatures and all objects, in degree, 
Are friends and patrons of humanity. 
There are to whom the garden, grove, and field, 
Perpetual lessons of forbearance yield ; 
Who would not lightly violate the grace 
The lowliest flower possesses in its place ; 
Nor shorten the sweet life, too fugitive, 
Which nothing less than Infinite Power could give. 
. 

XXXI. 
THOUGHT ON THE SEASONS. 
Flattered with promise of escape 
From every hurtful blast, 
Spring takes, sprightly May ! thy shape, 
Her loveliest and her last. 
Less fair is summer riding high 
In fierce solstitial power, 
Less fair than when a lenient sky 
Brings on her parting hour. 
When earth repays with golden sheaves 
The labours of the plough, 
And ripening fruits and forest leaves 
All brighten on the bough ; 
What pensive beauty autumn shows, 
Before she hears the sound 
Of winter rushing in, to close 
The emblematic round ! 
Such be our Spring, our Summer such ; 
So may our Autumn blend 
With hoary Winter, and Life touch, 
Through heaven-born hope, her end ! 

. 


TO 

UPON THE BIETH OF HER FIRST-BORN CHILD, MARCH, . 
' Turn porro puer, ut saevis projectus ab undis 
Navita, nudus humi jacet, &c.' — Lucretius. 
Like a shipwreck'd Sailor tost 
By rough waves on a perilous coast, 
Lies the Babe, in helplessness 
And in tenderest nakedness, 
Flung by labouring nature forth 
Upon the mercies of the earth. 
Can its eyes beseech ?— no more 
Than the hands are free to implore : 
Voice but serves for one brief cry ; 
Plaint was it ? or prophecy 
Of sorrow that will surely come ? 
Omen of man's grievous doom ! 
But, Mother ! by the close 
Duly granted to thy throes ; 
By the silent thanks, now tending 
Incense-like to Heaven, descending 
Now to mingle and to move 
With the gush of earthly love, 
As a debt to that frail Creature, 
Instrument of struggling Nature 
For the blissful calm, the peace 
Known but to this one release — 
Can the pitying spirit doubt 
That for human-kind springs out 
From the penalty a sense 
Of more than mortal recompence ? 
As a floating summer cloud, 
Though of gorgeous drapery proud, 
To the sun-burnt traveller, 
Or the stooping labourer, 
Oft-times makes its bounty known 
By its shadow round him thrown ; 
So, by chequerings of sad cheer, 
Heavenly Guardians, brooding near, 
Of their presence tell — too bright 
Haply for corporeal sight ! 
Ministers of grace divine 
Feelingly their brows incline 
O'er this seeming Castaway 
Breathing, in the light of day, 
Something like the faintest breath 
That has power to baffle death — 
Beautiful, while very weakness 
Captivates like passive meekness. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

And, sweet Mother ! under warrant 
Of the universal Parent, 
Who repays in season due 
Them who have, like thee, been true 
To the filial chain let down 
From his everlasting throne, 
Angels hovering round thy couch, 
With their softest whispers vouch, 
That— whatever griefs may fret, 
Cares entangle, sins beset, 
This thy First-born, and with tears 
Stain her cheek in future years — 
Heavenly succour, not denied 
To the babe, whate'er betide, 
Will to the woman be supplied ! 
Mother ! blest be thy calm ease ; 
Blest the starry promises, — 
And the firmament benign 
Hallowed be it, where they shine ! 
Yes, for them whose souls have scope 
Ample for a winged hope, 
And can earthward bend an ear 
For needful listening, pledge is here, 
That, if thy new-born Charge shall tread 
In thy footsteps, and be led 
By that other Guide, whose light 
Of manly virtues, mildly bright, 
Gave him first the wished-for part 
In thy gentle virgin heart ; 
Then, amid the storms of fife 
Presignified by that dread strife 
Whence ye have escaped together, 
She may look for serene weather ; 
In all trials sure to find 
Comfort for a faithful mind ; 
Kindlier issues, holier rest, 
Than even now await her prest, 
Conscious Nursling, to thy breast ! 

THE WARNING. 
A SEQUEL TO THE FOKEGOING. 
iiST, the winds of March are blowing ; 
ter ground-flowers shrink, afraid of showing 
.'heir meek heads to the nipping air, 
■Vhich ye feel not, happy pair ! 
jink into a kindly sleep. 
^e, meanwhile, our hope will keep ; 
.nd if Time leagued with adverse Change 

(Too busy fear !) shall cross its range, 
Whatsoever check they bring, 
Anxious duty hindering, 
To like hope our prayers will cling. 
Thus, while the ruminating spirit feeds 
Upon the events of home as life proceeds, 
Affections pure and holy in their source 
Gain a fresh impulse, run a livelier course ; 
Hopes that within the Father's heart prevail, 
Are in the experienced Grandsire's slow to fail ; 
And if the harp pleased his gay youth, it rings 
To his grave touch with no unready strings, 
While thoughts press on, and feelings overflow, 
And quick words round him fall like flakes of snow. 
Thanks to the Powers that yet maintain their 
sway, 
And have renewed the tributary Lay. 
Truths of the heart flock in with eager pace, 
And Fancy greets them with a fond embrace ; 
Swift as the rising sun his beams extends 
She shoots the tidings forth to distant friends ; 
Their gifts she hails (deemed precious, as they prove 
For the unconscious Babe so prompt a love !) — 
But from this peaceful centre of delight 
Vague sympathies have urged her to take flight : 
Rapt into upper regions, like the bee 
That sucks from mountain heath her honey fee ; 
Or, like the warbling lark intent to shroud 
His head in sunbeams or a bowery cloud, 
She soars — and here and there her pinions rest 
On proud towers, like this humble cottage, blest 
With a new visitant, an infant guest — 
Towers where red streamers flout the breezy sky 
In pomp foreseen by her creative eye, 
When feasts shall crowd the hall, and steeple bells 
Glad proclamation make, and heights and dells 
Catch the blithe music as it sinks and swells, 
And harboured ships, whose pride is on the sea, 
Shall hoist their topmast flags in sign of glee, 
Honouring the hope of noble ancestry. 
But who (though neither reckoning ills assigned 
By Nature, nor reviewing in the mind 
The track that was, and is, and must be, worn 
With weary feet by all of woman born) — 
Shall now by such a gift with joy be moved, 
Nor feel the fulness of that joy reproved ? 
Not He, whose last faint memory will command 
The truth that Britain was his native land ; 
Whose infant soul was tutored to confide 
In the cleansed faith for which her martyrs died ; 
Whose boyish ear the voice of her renown 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

With rapture thrilled ; whose Youth revered the 
crown 
Of Saxon liberty that Alfred wore, 
Alfred, dear Babe, thy great Progenitor ! 
— Not He, who from her mellowed practice drew 
His social sense of just, and fair, and true ; 
And saw, thereafter, on the soil of France 
Rash Polity begin her maniac dance. 
Foundations broken up, the deeps run wild, 
Nor grieved to see (himself not unbeguiled) — 
Woke from the dream, the dreamer to upbraid, 
And learn how sanguine expectations fade 
When novel trusts by folly are betrayed, — 
To see Presumption, turning pale, refrain 
From further havoc, but repent in vain, — 
Good aims lie down, and perish in the road 
Where guilt had urged them on with ceaseless goad, 
Proofs thickening round her that on public ends 
Domestic virtue vitally depends, 
That civic strife can turn the happiest hearth 
Into a grievous sore of self-tormenting earth. 
Can such a One, dear Babe ! though glad and 
proud 
To welcome thee, repel the fears that crowd 
Into his English breast, and spare to quake 
Less for his own than for thy innocent sake ? 
Too late — or, should the providence of God 
Lead, through dark ways by sin and sorrow trod, 
Justice and peace to a secure abode, 
Too soon — thou com'st into this breathing world ; 
Ensigns of mimic outrage are unfurled. 
Who shall preserve or prop the tottering Realm ? 
What hand suffice to govern the state-helm ? 
If, in the aims of men, the surest test 
Of good or bad (whate'er be sought for or profest) 
Lie in the means required, or ways ordained, 
For compassing the end, else never gained ; 
Yet governors and govern'd both are blind 
To this plain truth, or fling it to the wind ; 
If to expedience principle must bow ; 
Past, future, shrinking up beneath the incumbent 
Now; 
If cowardly concession still must feed 
The thirst for power in men who ne'er concede ; 
Nor turn aside, unless to shape a way 
For domination at some riper day ; 
If generous Loyalty must stand in awe 
Of subtle Treason, in his mask of law, 
Or with bravado insolent and hard, 
Provoking punishment, to win reward ; 
If office help the factious to conspire, 
And they who should extinguish, fan the fire — 
Then, will the sceptre be a straw, the crown 

Sit loosely, like the thistle's crest of down • 
To be blown off at will, by Power that spares it 
In cunning patience, from the head that wears it. 
Lost people, trained to theoretic feud ! 
Lost above all, ye labouring multitude ! 
Bewildered whether ye, by slanderous tongues 
Deceived, mistake calamities for wrongs ; 
And over fancied usurpations brood, 
Oft snapping at revenge in sullen mood ; 
Or, from long stress of real injuries fly 
To desperation for a remedy ; 
In bursts of outrage spread your judgments wide. 
And to your wrath cry out, " Be thou our guide f 
Or, bound by oaths, come forth to tread earth's 
floor 
In marshalled thousands, darkening street and moor 
With the worst shape mock-patience ever wore ; 
Or, to the giddy top of self-esteem 
By Flatterers carried, mount into a dream 
Of boundless suffrage, at whose sage behest 
Justice shall rule, disorder be supprest, 
And every man sit down as Plenty's Guest ! 
— for a bridle bitted with remorse 
To stop your Leaders in their headstrong course ! 
Oh may the Almighty scatter with his grace 
These mists, and lead you to a safer place, 
By paths no human wisdom can foretrace ! 
May He pour round you, from worlds far above 
Man's feverish passions, his pure light of love, 
That quietly restores the natural mien 
To hope, and makes truth willing to be seen ! 
Else shall your blood-stained hands in frenzy reap 
Fields gaily sown when promises were cheap. — 
Why is the Past belied with wicked art, 
The Future made to play so false a part, 
Among a people famed for strength of mind, 
Foremost in freedom, noblest of mankind ? 
We act as if we joyed in the sad tune 
Storms make in rising, valued in the moon 
Nought but her changes. Thus, ungrateful Nation ! 
If thou persist, and, scorning moderation, 
Spread for thyself the snares of tribulation, 
Whom, then, shall meekness guard ? What BttHDg 
skill 
Lie in forbearance, strength in standing still? 
—Soon shall the widow (for the speed of Time 
Nought equals when the hours are winged with 
crime) 
Widow, or wife, implore en tremulous knee. 
From him who judged her lord, a like decree J 
The skies will weep o'er old men desolate : 
Ye little-ones ! Earth shudders at your fate, 
Outcasts and homeless orphans 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION.  

But turn, my Soul, and from the sleeping pair 

Lord ! since his rising in the East, 

earn thou the beauty of omniscient care ! 

If we have faltered or transgressed, 

e strong in faith, bid anxious thoughts lie still ; 

Guide, from thy love's abundant source, 

ek for the good and cherish it — the ill 

What yet remains of this day's course : 

ppose, or bear with a submissive will. 
. 


Help with thy grace, through life's short day, 


Our upward and our downward way ; 
And glorify for us the west, 



When we shall sink to final rest. 

XXXIV. 
If this great world of joy and pain 

. 


Revolve in one sure track ; 

XXXVI. 

If freedom, set, will rise again, 

ODE, 

And virtue, flown, come back ; 



COMPOSED ON MAT MORNING. 

Woe to the purblind crew who fill 


The heart with each day's care ; 
Nor gain, from past or future, skill 

While from the purpling east departs 
The star that led the dawn, 

To bear, and to forbear ! 

Blithe Flora from her couch upstarts, 

. 

For May is on the lawn. 


A quickening hope, a freshening glee, 
Foreran the expected Power, 



Whose first-drawn breath, from bush and tree, 

XXXV. 

Shakes off that pearly shower. 

THE LABOURER'S NOON -DAY HYMN. 

All Nature welcomes Her whose sway 

Up to the throne of God is borne 

Tempers the year's extremes ; 


Who scattereth lustres o'er noon-day, 

The voice of praise at early morn, 

And he accepts the punctual hymn 
Sung as the light of day grows dim. 

Like morning's dewy gleams ; 
While mellow warble, sprightly trill, 


The tremulous heart excite ; 

Nor will he turn his ear aside 

And hums the balmy air to still 

From holy offerings at noontide. 

The balance of delight. 

Then here reposing let us raise 

Time was, blest Power ! when youths and maids 

A song of gratitude and praise. 

At peep of dawn would rise, 


And wander forth, in forest glades 
Thy birth to solemnize. 

What though our burthen be not light 

We need not toil from morn to night ; 

Though mute the song — to grace the rite 

The respite of the mid-day hour 

Untouched the hawthorn bough, 
Thy Spirit triumphs o'er the slight ; 

Is in the thankful Creature's power. 


Man changes, but not Thou ! 

Blest are the moments, doubly blest, 


That, drawn from this one hour of rest, 

Thy feathered Lieges bill and wings 

Are with a ready heart bestowed 

In love's disport employ ; 

Upon the service of our God ! 

Warmed by thy influence, creeping things 


Awake to silent joy : 

Each field is then a hallowed spot, 

Queen art thou still for each gay plant 

An altar is in each man's cot, 

Where the slim wild deer roves; 

A church in every grove that spreads 

And served in depths where fishes haunt 

Its living roof above our heads. 

Their own mysterious groves. 

Look up to Heaven ! the industrious Sun 

Cloud-piercing peak, and trackless heath, 

Already half his race hath run ; 

Instinctive homage pay ; 

> He cannot halt nor go astray, 

Nor wants the dim-lit cave a wreath 

But our immortal Spirits may. 

To honour thee, sweet May ! 



 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

Where cities fanned by thy brisk airs 
Behold a smokeless sky, 
Their puniest flower-pot-nursling dares 
To open a bright eye. 
And if, on this thy natal morn, 
The pole, from which thy name 
Hath not departed, stands forlorn 
Of song and dance and game ; 
Still from the village-green a vow 
Aspires to thee addrest, 
Wherever peace is on the brow, 
Or love within the breast. 
Yes ! where Love nestles thou canst teach 
The soul to love the more ; 
Hearts also shall thy lessons reach 
That never loved before. 
Stript is the haughty one of pride, 
The bashful freed from fear, 
While rising, like the ocean-tide, 
In flows the joyous year. 
Hush, feeble lyre ! weak words refuse 
The service to prolong ! 
To yon exulting thrush the Muse 
Entrusts the imperfect song ; 
His voice shall chant, in accents clear, 
Throughout the live-long day, 
Till the first silver star appear, 
The sovereignty of May. 

TO MAY. 

Though many suns have risen and set 
Since thou, blithe May, wert born, 
And Bards, who hailed thee, may forget 
Thy gifts, thy beauty scorn ; 
There are who to a birthday strain 
Confine not harp and voice, 
But evermore throughout thy reign 
Are grateful and rejoice ! 
Delicious odours ! music sweet, 
Too sweet to pass away ! 
Oh for a deathless song to meet 
The soul's desire — a lay 
That, when a thousand years are told, 
Should praise thee, genial Power ! 
Through summer heat, autumnal cold, 
And winter's dreariest hour. 

Earth, sea, thy presence feel — nor less, 
If yon ethereal blue 
With its soft smile the truth express, 
The heavens have felt it too. 
The inmost heart of man if glad 
Partakes a livelier cheer ; 
And eyes that cannot but be sad 
Let fall a brightened tear. 
Since thy return, through days and weeks 
Of hope that grew by stealth, 
How many wan and faded cheeks 
Have kindled into health ! 
The Old, by thee revived, have said, 
" Another year is ours ;" 
And wayworn Wanderers, poorly fed, 
Have smiled upon thy flowers. 
Who tripping lisps a merry song 
Amid his playful peers ? 
The tender Infant who was long 
A prisoner of fond fears ; 
But now, when every sharp-edged blast 
Is quiet in its sheath, 
His Mother leaves him free to taste 
Earth's sweetness in thy breath. 
Thy help is with the weed that creeps 
Along the humblest ground ; 
No cliff so bare but on its steeps 
Thy favours may be found ; 
But most on some peculiar nook 
That our own hands have drest, 
Thou and thy tram are proud to look, 
And seem to love it best. 
And yet how pleased we wander forth 
When May is whispering, " Come ! 
" Choose from the bowers of virgin earth 
" The happiest for your home ; 
" Heaven's bounteous love through me is 
" From sunshine, clouds, winds, waves, 
" Drops on the mouldering turret's head, 
" And on your turf-clad graves ! " 
Such greeting heard, away with sighs 
For lilies that must fade, 
Or ' the rathe primrose as it dies 
Forsaken' in the shade ! 
Vernal fruitions and desires 
Are linked in endless chase ; 
While, as one kindly growth retires, 
Another takes its place. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

And what if thou, sweet May, hast known 
'. Mishap by worm and blight ; 
If expectations newly blown 
Have perished in thy sight ; 
jlf loves and joys, while up they sprung, 
Were caught as in a snare ; 
iSuch is the lot of all the young, 
I However bright and fair. 
Lo ! Streams that April could not check 
i Are patient of thy rule ; 
'Gurgling in foamy water-break, 
Loitering in glassy pool : 
By thee, thee only, could be sent 
Such gentle mists as glide, 
burling with unconfirmed intent, 
On that green mountain's side. 
How delicate the leafy veil 
Through which yon house of God 
jleams 'mid the peace of this deep dale 
By few but shepherds trod ! 
|ind lowly huts, near beaten ways, 
I No sooner stand attired 
n thy fresh wreaths, than they for praise 
Peep forth, and are admired. 
season of fancy and of hope, 
Permit not for one hour, 
A blossom from thy crown to drop, 
I Nor add to it a flower ! 
Seep, lovely May, as if by touch 
! Of self-restraining art, 
This modest charm of not too much, 
Part seen, imagined part ! 

LINES 
SUGGESTED BT A PORTRAIT FROM THE PENCIL OF 
F. STONE. 
guiled into forgetfulness of care 
■ e to the day's unfinished task ; of pen 
 book regardless, and of that fair scene 
(Nature's prodigality displayed 
sfore my window, oftentimes and long 
aze upon a Portrait whose mild gleam 
I beauty never ceases to enrich 
le common light ; whose stillness charms the air, 
I seems to charm it, into like repose ; 
hose silence, for the pleasure of the ear, 
>asses sweetest music. There she sits 

rp; 

With emblematic purity attired 
In a white vest, white as her marble neck 
Is, and the pillar of the throat would be 
But for the shadow by the drooping chin 
Cast into that recess — the tender shade, 
The shade and light, both there and every where, 
And through the very atmosphere she breathes, 
Broad, clear, and toned harmoniously, with skill 
That might from nature have been learnt in the 
hour 
When the lone shepherd sees the morning spread 
Upon the mountains. Look at her, whoe'er 
Thou be that, kindling with a poet's soul, 
Hast loved the painter's true Promethean craft 
Intensely — from Imagination take 
The treasure, — what mine eyes behold see thou, 
Even though the Atlantic ocean roll between. 
A silver line, that runs from brow to crown 
And in the middle parts the braided hair, 
Just serves to show how delicate a soil 
The golden harvest grows in ; and those eyes, 
Soft and capacious as a cloudless sky 
Whose azure depth their colour emulates, 
Must needs be conversant with upwaid looks, 
Prayer's voiceless service ; but now, seeking nought 
And shunning nought, their own peculiar life 
Of motion they renounce, and with the head 
Partake its inclination towards earth 
In humble grace, and quiet pensiveness 
Caught at the point where it stops short of sadness. 
Offspring of soul-bewitching Art, make me 
Thy confidant ! say, whence derived that air 
Of calm abstraction ? Can the ruling thought 
Be with some lover far away, or one 
Crossed by misfortune, or of doubted faith ? 
Inapt conjecture ! Childhood here, a moon 
Crescent in simple loveliness serene, 
Has but approached the gates of womanhood, 
Not entered them ; her heart is yet unpierced 
By the blind Archer-god ; her fancy free : 
The fount of feeling, if unsought elsewhere, 
Will not be found. 
Her right hand, as it lies 
Across the slender wrist of the left arm 
Upon her lap reposing, holds — but mark 
How slackly, for the absent mind permits 
No firmer grasp — a little wild-flower, joined 
As in a posy, with a few pale ears 
Of yellowing corn, the same that overtopped 
And in their common birthplace sheltered it 
'Till they were plucked together ; a blue flower 
Called by the thrifty husbandman a weed ; 

 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

But Ceres, in her garland, might have worn 
That ornament, unblamed. The floweret, held 
In scarcely conscious fingers, was, she knows, 
(Her Father told her so) in youth's gay dawn 
Her Mother's favourite ; and the orphan Girl, 
In her own dawn — a dawn less gay and bright, 
Loves it, while there in solitary peace 
She sits, for that departed Mother's sake. 
— Not from a source less sacred is derived 
(Surely I do not err) that pensive air 
Of calm abstraction through the face diffused 
And the whole person. 
Words have something told 
More than the pencil can, and verily 
More than is needed, but the precious Art 
Forgives their interference — Art divine, 
That both creates and fixes, in despite 
Of Death and Time, the marvels it hath wrought. 
Strange contrasts have we in this world of ours ! 
That posture, and the look of filial love 
Thinking of past and gone, with what is left 
Dearly united, might be swept away 
From this fair Portrait's fleshly Archetype, 
Even by an innocent fancy's slightest freak 
Banished, nor ever, haply, be restored 
To their lost place, or meet in harmony 
So exquisite ; but here do they abide, 
Enshrined for ages. Is not then the Art 
Godlike, a humble branch of the divine, 
In visible quest of immortality, 
Stretched forth with trembling hope?— In every 
realm, 
From high Gibraltar to Siberian plains, 
Thousands, in each variety of tongue 
That Europe knows, would echo this appeal ; 
One above all, a Monk who waits on God 
In the magnific Convent built of yore 
To sanctify the Escurial palace. He — 
Guiding, from cell to cell and room to room, 
A British Painter (eminent for truth 
In character, and depth of feeling, shown 
By labours that have touched the hearts of kings, 
And are endeared to simple cottagers) — - 
Came, in that service, to a glorious work, 
Our Lord's Last Supper, beautiful as when first 
The appropriate Picture, fresh from Titian's hand, 
Graced the Refectory : and there, while both 
Stood with eyes fixed upon that masterpiece, 
The hoary Father in the Stranger's ear 
Breathed out these words : — " Here daily do we sit, 
Thanks given to God for daily bread, and here 
Pondering the mischiefs of these restless times, 
And thinking of my Brethren, dead, dispersed, 

Or changed and changing, I not seldom gaze 
Upon this solemn Company unmoved 
By shock of circumstance, or lapse of years, 
Until I cannot but believe that they — 
They are in truth the Substance, we the Shadow 
So spake the mild Jeronymite, his griefs 
Melting away within him like a dream 
Ere he had ceased to gaze, perhaps to speak : 
And I, grown old, but in a happier land, 
Domestic Portrait ! have to verse consigned 
In thy calm presence those heart-moving words : 
Words that can soothe, more than they agitate : 
Whose spirit, like the angel that went down 
Into Bethesda's pool, with healing virtue 
Informs the fountain in the human breast 
Which by the visitation was disturbed. 
But why this stealing tear % Companion mr 
On thee I look, not sorrowing ; fare thee well, 
My Song's Inspirer, once again farewell ! 

THE FOREGOING SUBJECT RESUMED. 
Among a grave fraternity of Monks, 
For One, but surely not for One alone, 
Triumphs, in that great work, the Painter's skill 
Humbling the body, to exalt the soul ; 
Yet representing, amid wreck and wrong 
And dissolution and decay, the warm 
And breathing life of flesh, as if already 
Clothed with impassive majesty, and graced 
With no mean earnest of a heritage 
Assigned to it in future worlds. Thou, too, 
With thy memorial flower, meek Portraiture! 
From whose serene companionship I passed 
Pursued by thoughts that haunt me still ; tli 
also — 
Though but a simple object, into light 
Called forth by those affections that endear 
The private hearth ; though keeping thy sole sea 
In singleness, and little tried by time, 
Creation, as it were, of yesterday — 
With a congenial function art endued 
For each and all of us, together joined 
In course of nature under a low roof 

 The pile of buildings, composing the palace and on 
vent of San Lorenzo, has, in common usage, lost il 
name in that of the Escurial, a village at the foot of il" 
hill upon which the splendid edifice, built by Philip"" 
Second, stands. It need scarcely be added, that Wilkic il 
the painter alluded to. 

POEMS OF SENTIMENT AND REFLECTION. 

 

ly charities and duties that proceed 
hit of the bosom of a wiser vow. 
a like salutary sense of awe 
t sacred wonder, growing with the power 
 f meditation that attempts to weigh, 
l faithful scales, things and their opposites, 
an thy enduring quiet gently raise 
household small and sensitive, — whose love, 
ependent as in part its blessings are 
,pon frail ties dissolving or dissolved 
earth, will be revived, we trust, in heaven. 
. 

" 

 fair, so sweet, withal so sensitive, 
r ould that the little Flowers were born to live, 
mscious of half the pleasure which they give ; 
hat to this mountain-daisy's self were known 
he beauty of its star-shaped shadow, thrown 
q the smooth surface of this naked stone ! 
i 
ud what if hence a bold desire should mount 
|igh as the Sun, that he could take account 
f all that issues from his glorious fount ! 
p might he ken how by his sovereign aid 
aese delicate companionships are made ; 
ad how he rules the pomp of light and shade ; 
d were the Sister-power that shines by night 
,i privileged, what a countenance of delight 
'ould through the clouds break forth on human 
sight ! 
md fancies ! wheresoe'er shall turn thine eye 
I earth, air, ocean, or the starry sky, 
inverse with Nature in pure sympathy ; 
II vain desires, all lawless wishes quelled, 
b Thou to love and praise alike impelled, 
hatever boon is granted or withheld. 
V In the class entitled " Musings," in Mr. Southey's 
' nor Poems, is one upon his own miniature Picture, 
Jen in childhood, and another upon a landscape painted 
Gaspar Poussin. It is possible that every word of the 
iove verses, though similar in subject, might have been 
kitten had the author been unacquainted with those 
lutiful effusions of poetic sentiment. But, for his own 
;;isfaction, he must be allowed thus publicly to acknow- 
Ige the pleasure those two Poems of his Friend have 
'en him, and the grateful influence they have upon his 
nd as often as he reads them, or thinks of them. 

UPON SEEING A COLOURED DRAWING OF THE BIRD 
OF PARADISE IN AN ALBUM. 
Who rashly strove thy Image to portray ? 
Thou buoyant minion of the tropic air ; 
How could he think of the live creature — gay 
With a divinity of colours, drest 
In all her brightness, from the dancing crest 
Far as the last gleam of the filmy train 
Extended and extending to sustain 
The motions that it graees — and forbear 
To drop his pencil ! Flowers of every clime 
Depicted on these pages smile at time ; 
And gorgeous insects copied with nice care 
Are here, and likenesses of many a shell 
Tossed ashore by restless waves, 
Or in the diver's grasp fetched up from caves 
Where sea-nymphs might be proud to dwell : 
But whose rash hand (again I ask) could dare, 
'Mid casual tokens and promiscuous shows, 
To circumscribe this Shape in fixed repose ; 
Could imitate for indolent survey, 
Perhaps for touch profane, 
Plumes that might catch, but cannot keep, a stain ; 
And, with cloud-streaks lightest and loftiest, share 
The sun's first greeting, his last farewell ray ! 
Resplendent Wanderer ! followed with glad eyes 
Where'er her course ; mysterious Bird ! 
To whom, by wondering Fancy stirred, 
Eastern Islanders have given 
A holy name — the Bird of Heaven ! 
And even a title higher still, 
The Bird of God ! whose blessed will 
She seems performing as she flies 
Over the earth and through the skies 
In never-wearied search of Paradise — 
Region that crowns her beauty with the name 
She bears for us — for us how blest, 
How happy at all seasons, could like aim 
Uphold our Spirits urged to kindred flight 
On wings that fear no glance of God's pure sight, 
No tempest from his breath, their promised rest 
Seeking with indefatigable quest 
Above a world that deems itself most wise 
When most enslaved by gross realities ! 
a. 

 

SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBERTY AND ORDER. 

SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBERTY AND ORDER. 

COMPOSED AFTER READING A NEWSPAPER OF THE DAY. 
" People ! your chains are severing link by link ; 
Soon shall the Rich be levelled down — the Poor 
Meet them half way." Vain boast ! for These, the 
more 
They thus would rise, must low and lower sink 
Till, by repentance stung, they fear to think ; 
While all lie prostrate, save the tyrant few 
Bent in quick turns each other to undo, 
And mix the poison, they themselves must drink. 
Mistrust thyself, vain Country ! cease to cry, 
" Knowledge will save me from the threatened woe." 
For, if than other rash ones more thou know, 
Yet on presumptuous wing as far would fly 
Above thy knowledge as they dared to go, 
Thou wilt provoke a heavier penalty. 

UPON THE LATE GENERAL FAST. 
March, . 
Reluctant call it was ; the rite delayed ; 
And in the Senate some there were who doffed 
The last of their humanity, and scoffed 
At providential judgments, undismayed 
By their own daring. But the People prayed 
As with one voice ; their flinty heart grew soft 
With penitential sorrow, and aloft 
Their spirit mounted, crying, " God us aid !" 
Oh that with aspirations more intense, 
Chastised by self-abasement more profound, 
This People, once so happy, so renowned 
For liberty, would seek from God defence 
Against far heavier ill, the pestilence 
Of revolution, impiously unbound ! 

Said Secrecy to Cowardice and Fraud, 
Falsehood and Treachery, in close council met, 
Deep under ground, in Pluto's cabinet, 
" The frost of England's pride will soon be thawed ; 
" Hooded the open brow that overawed 
" Our schemes ; the faith and honour, never yet 

" By us with hope encountered, be upset ; — 
" For once I burst my bands, and cry, applaud !" 
Then whispered she, " The Bill is carrying out !" 
They heard, and, starting up, the Brood of Night 
Clapped hands, and shook with glee their matie 
locks ; 
All Powers and Places that abhor the light 
Joined in the transport, echoed back their shout, 
Hurrah for , hugging his Ballot-box ! 

Blest Statesman He, whose Mind's unselfish will 
Leaves him at ease among grand thoughts : whos 
Sees that, apart from magnanimity, 
Wisdom exists not ; nor the humbler skill 
Of Prudence, disentangling good and ill 
With patient care. What tho' assaults run high. 
They daunt not him who holds his ministry, 
Resolute, at all hazards, to fulfil 
Its duties ; — prompt to move, but firm to wait,— 
Knowing, things rashly sought are rarely found ; 
That, for the functions of an ancient State — 
Strong by her charters, free because imbound, 
Servant of Providence, not slave of Fate — 
Perilous is sweeping change, all chance unsound. 

IN ALLUSION TO VARIOUS RECENT HISTORIES 
NOTICES OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 
Portentous change when History can appear 
As the cool Advocate of foul device ; 
Reckless audacity extol, and jeer 
At consciences perplexed with scruples nice ! 
They who bewail not, must abhor, the sneer 
Born of Conceit, Power's blind Idolater ; 
Or haply sprung from vaunting Cowardice 
Betrayed by mockery of holy fear. 
Hath it not long been said the wrath of Man 
Works not the righteousness of God ? Oh bend, 
Bend, ye Perverse ! to judgments from on High, 
Laws that lay under Heaven's perpetual ban 
All principles of action that transcend 
The sacred limits of humanity. 

SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBERTY AND ORDER. 

 

CONTINUED. 
Vuo ponders National events shall find 
L n awful balancing of loss and gain, 
oy based on sorrow, good with ill combined, 
;nd proud deliverance issuing out of pain 
jid direful throes ; as if the All-ruling Mind, 
itk whose perfection it consists to ordain 
j'olcanic burst, earthquake, and hurricane, 
iealt in like sort with feeble human kind 
|y laws immutable. But woe for him 
Vho thus deceived shall lend an eager hand 
o social havoc. Is not Conscience ours, 
! .nd Truth, whose eye guilt only can make dim ; 
.nd Will, whose office, by divine command, 
B to control and check disordered Powers ? 

CONCLUDED. 
ong-favoured England ! be not thou misled 
y monstrous theories of alien growth, 
est alien frenzy seize thee, waxing wroth, 
'lf-smitten till thy garments reek dyed red 
Pith thy own blood, which tears in torrents shed 
ail to wash out, tears flowing ere thy troth 
le plighted, not to ease but sullen sloth, 
r wan despair — the ghost of false hope fled 
,'ito a shameful grave. Among thy youth, 
,"y Country ! if such warning be held dear, 
ihen shall a Veteran's heart be thrilled with joy, 
me who would gather from eternal truth, 
ior time and season, rules that work to cheer — 
lot scourge, to save the People — not destroy. 

• en of the Western World ! in Fate's dark book 
r hence these opprobrious leaves of dire portent ? 
-link ye your British Ancestors forsook 
lieir native Land, for outrage provident ; 
rom unsubmissive necks the bridle shook 
■) give, in their Descendants, freer vent 
nd wider range to passions turbulent, 
 mutual tyranny a deadlier look? 
ay, said a voice, soft as the south wind's breath, 
,ive through the stormy surface of the flood 
b the great current flowing underneath ; 
xplore the countless springs of silent good ; 
p shall the truth be better understood, 
,nd thy grieved Spirit brighten strong in faith. 

TO THE PENNSYLVANIANS. 
Days undefiled by luxury or sloth, 
Firm self-denial, manners grave and staid, 
Rights equal, laws with cheerfulness obeyed, 
Words that require no sanction from an oath, 
And simple honesty a common growth — 
This high repute, with bounteous Nature's aid, 
Won confidence, now ruthlessly betrayed 
At will, your power the measure of your troth ! — 
All who revere the memory of Penn 
Grieve for the land on whose wild woods his name 
Was fondly grafted with a virtuous aim, 
Renounced, abandoned by degenerate Men 
For state-dishonour black as ever came 
To upper air from Mammon's loathsome den. 

AT BOLOGNA, IN REMEMBRANCE OF THE LATE 
INSURRECTIONS, . 

Ah why deceive ourselves ! by no mere fit 
Of sudden passion roused shall men attain 
True freedom where for ages they have lain 
Bound in a dark abominable pit, 
With life's best sinews more and more unbent. 
Here, there, a banded few who loathe the chain 
May rise to break it : effort worse than vain 
For thee, great Italian nation, split 
Into those jarring fractions. — Let thy scope 
Be one fixed mind for all ; thy rights approve 
To thy own conscience gradually renewed ; 
Learn to make Time the father of wise Hope ; 
Then trust thy cause to the arm of Fortitude, 
The light of Knowledge, and the warmth of Love. 

CONTINUED. 
ii. 
Hard task ! exclaim the undisciplined, to lean 
On Patience coupled with such slow endeavour, 
That long-lived servitude must last for ever. 
Perish the grovelling few, who, prest between 
Wrongs and the terror of redress, would wean 
Millions from glorious aims. Our chains to sever 
Let us break forth in tempest now or never ! — 
What, is there then no space for golden mean 
And gradual progress % — Twilight leads to day, 
And, even within the burning zones of earth, 
The hastiest sunrise yields a temperate ray ; 
The softest breeze to fairest flowers gives birth : 
Think not that Prudence dwells in dark abodes, 
She scans the future with the eye of gods. 
c c  


 

SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBERTY AND ORDER. 

XII. 
CONCLUDED. 
III. 
As leaves are to the tree whereon they grow 
And wither, every human generation 
Is to the Being of a mighty nation, 
Locked in our world's embrace through weal and 
woe ; 
Thought that should teach the zealot to forego 
Rash schemes, to abjure all selfish agitation, 
And seek through noiseless pains and moderation 
The unblemished good they only can bestow. 
Alas ! with most, who weigh futurity 
Against time present, passion holds the scales : 
Hence equal ignorance of both prevails, 
And nations sink ; or, struggling to be free, 
Are doomed to flounder on, like wounded whales 
Tossed on the bosom of a stormy sea. 

Young England — what is then become of Old 
Of dear Old England ? Think they she is dead, 
Dead to the very name ? Presumption fed 
On empty air ! That name will keep its hold 

In the true filial bosom's inmost fold 
For ever. — The Spirit of Alfred, at the head 
Of all who for her rights watch'd, toil'd and bled 
Knows that this prophecy is not too bold. 
What — how ! shall she submit in will and deed 
To Beardless Boys — an imitative race, 
The servum pecus of a Gallic breed ? 
Dear Mother ! if thou must thy steps retrace, 
Go where at least meek Innocency dwells ; 
Let Babes and Sucklings be thy oracles. 

Feel for the wrongs to universal ken 
Daily exposed, woe that unshrouded lies ; 
And seek the Sufferer in his darkest den, 
Whether conducted to the spot by sighs 
And moanings, or he dwells (as if the wren 
Taught him concealment) hidden from all eyes 
In silence and the awful modesties 
Of sorrow ; — feel for all, as brother Men ! 
Rest not in hope want's icy chain to thaw 
By casual boons and formal charities ; 
Learn to be just, just through impartial law ; 
Far as ye may, erect and equalise ; 
And, what ye cannot reach by statute, draw 
Each from his fountain of self-sacrifice ! 

SONNETS UPON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH. 

 

SONNETS UPON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH. 

IN SERIES. 

SUGGESTED BY THE VIEW OF LANCASTER CASTLE 
(ON THE ROAD FROM THE SOUTH). 
his Spot — at once unfolding sight so fair 
f sea and land, with yon grey towers that still 
ise up as if to lord it over air — 
light soothe in human breasts the sense of ill, 
r charm it out of memory ; yea, might fill 
lie heart with joy and gratitude to God 
lor all his bounties upon man bestowed : 
r hy bears it then the name of " Weeping Hill " \ 
ihousands, as toward yon old Lancastrian Towers, 
prison's crown, along this way they past 
or lingering durance or quick death with shame, 
torn this bare eminence thereon have cast 
heir first look — blinded as tears fell in showers 
led on their chains ; and hence that doleful name. 

enderly do we feel by Nature's law 
or worst offenders : though the heart will heave 
i ith indignation, deeply moved we grieve, 
after thought, for Him who stood in awe 
either of God nor man, and only saw, 
>st wretch, a horrible device enthroned 
p proud temptations, till the victim groaned 
ader the steel his hand had dared to draw. 
it , restrain compassion, if its course, 
 oft befals, prevent or turn aside 
idgments and aims and acts whose higher source 
sympathy with the unforewarned, who died 
ameless — with them that shuddered o'er his grave, 
id all who from the law firm safety crave. 

ie Roman Consul doomed his sons to die 
,ho had betrayed their country. The stem word 
jforded (may it through all time afford) 
I theme for praise and admiration high. 
)on the surface of humanity 
i rested not ; its depths his mind explored ; 

He felt ; but his parental bosom's lord 
Was Duty, — Duty calmed his agony. 
And some, we know, when they by wilful act 
A single human life have wrongly taken, 
Pass sentence on themselves, confess the fact, 
And, to atone for it, with soul unshaken 
Kneel at the feet of Justice, and, for faith 
Broken with all mankind, solicit death. 

Is Death, when evil against good has fought 
With such fell mastery that a man may dare 
By deeds the blackest purpose to lay bare ? 
Is Death, for one to that condition brought, 
For him, or any one, the thing that ought 
To be most dreaded? Lawgivers, beware, 
Lest, capital pains remitting till ye spare 
The murderer, ye, by sanction to that thought 
Seemingly given, debase the general mind ; 
Tempt the vague will tried standards to disown, 
Nor only palpable restraints unbind, 
But upon Honour's head disturb the crown, 
Whose absolute rule permits not to withstand 
In the weak love of life his least command. 

Not to the object specially designed, 
Howe'er momentous in itself it be, 
Good to promote or curb depravity, 
Is the wise Legislator's view confined. 
His Spirit, when most severe, is oft most kind ; 
As all Authority in earth depends 
On Love and Fear, their several powers he blends, 
Copying with awe the one Paternal mind. 
Uncaught by processes in show humane, 
He feels how far the act would derogate 
From even the humblest functions of the State ; 
If she, self-shorn of Majesty, ordain 
That never more shall hang upon her breath 
The last alternative of Life or Death. 

 

SONNETS UPON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH. 

Ye brood of conscience— Spectres ! that frequent 
The bad Man's restless walk, and haunt his bed — 
Fiends in your aspect, yet beneficent 
In act, as hovering Angels when they spread 
Then' wings to guard the unconscious Innocent — 
Slow be the Statutes of the land to share 
A laxity that could not but impair 
Tour power to punish crime, and so prevent. 
And ye, Beliefs ! coiled serpent-like about 
The adage on all tongues, " Murder will out," 
How shall your ancient warnings work for good 
In the full might they hitherto have shown, 
If for deliberate shedder of man's blood 
Survive not Judgment that requires his own \ 

Before the world had past her time of youth 
While polity and discipline were weak, 
The precept eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, 
Came forth — a light, though but as of day-break, 
Strong as could then be borne. A Master meek 
Proscribed the spirit fostered by that rule, 
Patience his law, long-suffering his school, 
And love the end, which all through peace must 
seek. 
But lamentably do they err who strain 
His mandates, given rash impulse to controul 
And keep vindictive thirstings from the soul, 
So far that, if consistent in their scheme, 
They must forbid the State to inflict a pain, 
Making of social order a mere dream. 

Fit retribution, by the moral code 
Determined, lies beyond the State's embrace, 
Yet, as she may, for each peculiar case 
She plants well-measured terrors in the road 
Of wrongful acts. Downward it is and broad, 
And, the main fear once doomed to banishment, 
Far oftener then, bad ushering worse event, 
Blood would be spilt that in his dark abode 
Crime might he better hid. And, should the 
change 
Take from the horror due to a foul deed, 
Pursuit and evidence so far must fail, 
And, guilt escaping, passion then might plead 
In angry spirits for her old free range, 
And the " wild justice of revenge " prevail. 

Though to give timely warning and deter 
Is one great aim of penalty, extend 
Thy mental vision further and ascend 
Far higher, else full surely shalt thou err. 
What is a State ? The wise behold in her 
A creature born of time, that keeps one eye 
Fixed on the statutes of Eternity, 
To which her judgments reverently defer. 
Speaking through Law's dispassionate voice th 
State 
Endues her conscience with external life 
And being, to preclude or quell the strife 
Of individual will, to elevate 
The grovelling mind, the erring to recal, 
And fortify the moral sense of all. 

Our bodily life, some plead, that life the shrine 
Of an immortal spirit, is a gift 
So sacred, so informed with light divine, 
That no tribunal, though most wise to sift 
Deed and intent, should turn the Being adrift 
Into that world where penitential tear 
May not avail, nor prayer have for God's ear 
A voice — that world whose veil no hand can lift 
For earthly sight. " Eternity and Time " 
Tliey urge, " have interwoven claims and rights 
Not to be jeopardised through foulest crime : 
The sentence rule by mercy's heaven-born lights 
Even so ; but measuring not by finite sense 
Infinite Power, perfect Intelligence. 

Ah, think how one compelled for life to abide 
Locked in a dungeon needs must eat the heart 
Out of his own humanity, and part 
With every hope that mutual cares provide ; 
And, should a less unnatural doom confide 
In life-long exile on a savage coast, 
Soon the relapsing penitent may boast 
Of yet more heinous guilt, with fiercer pride 
Hence thoughtful Mercy, Mercy sage and pare, 
Sanctions the forfeiture that Law demands, 
Leaving the final issue in His hands 
Whose goodness Itnows no change, whose love 
sure, 
Who sees, foresees; who cannot judge amiss, 
And wafts at will the contrite soul to bliss. 

SONNETS UPON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH. 

 

ee the Condemned alone within his cell 
i nd prostrate at some moment when remorse 
tings to the quick, and, with resistless force, 
ssaults the pride she strove in vain to quell. 
hen mark him, him who could so long rebel, 
he crime confessed, a kneeling Penitent 
efore the Altar, where the Sacrament 
jftens his heart, till from his eyes outwell 
'sars of salvation. Welcome death ! while Heaven 
oes in this change exceedingly rejoice ; 
r hile yet the solemn heed the State hath given 
elps him to meet the last Tribunal's voice 
l faith, which fresh offences, were he cast 
a old temptations, might for ever blast. 

CONCLUSION. 
es, though He well may tremble at the sound 
fhis own voice, who from the judgment-seat 
hnds the pale Convict to his last retreat 
death ; though Listeners shudder all around, 
ley know the dread requital's source profound ; 
)r is, they feel, its wisdom obsolete — 
Vould that it were !) the sacrifice unmeet 

For Christian Faith. But hopeful signs abound j 
The social rights of man breathe purer air ; 
Religion deepens her preventive care ; 
Then, moved by needless fear of past abuse, 
Strike not from Law's firm hand that awful rod, 
But leave it thence to drop for lack of use : 
Oh, speed the blessed hour, Almighty God ! 

The formal World relaxes her cold chain 
For One who speaks in numbers ; ampler scope 
His utterance finds ; and, conscious of the gain, 
Imagination works with bolder hope 
The cause of grateful reason to sustain ; 
And, serving Truth, the heart more strongly beats 
Against all barriers which his labour meets 
In lofty place, or humble Life's domain. 
Enough ; — before us lay a painful road, 
And guidance have I sought in duteous love 
From Wisdom's heavenly Father. Hence hath 
flowed 
Patience, with trust that, whatsoe'er the way 
Each takes in this high matter, all may move 
Cheered with the prospect of a brighter day. 
 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

EPISTLE 
TO SIR GEORGE HOWLAND BEAUMONT, BART. 
FEOM THE SODTH-WEST COAST OF CUMBERLAND. — . 
Far from our home by Grasmere's quiet Lake, 
From the Vale's peace which all her fields partake, 
Here on the bleakest point of Cumbria's shore 
We sojourn stunned by Ocean's ceaseless roar ; 
While, day by day, grim neighbour ! huge Black 
Comb 
Frowns deepening visibly his native gloom, 
Unless, perchance rejecting in despite 
What on the Plain we have of warmth and light, 
In his own storms he hides himself from sight. 
Rough is the time ; and thoughts, that would be free 
From heaviness, oft fly, dear Friend, to thee ; 
Turn from a spot where neither sheltered road 
Nor hedge-row screen invites my steps abroad ; 
Where one poor Plane-tree, having as it might 
Attained a stature twice a tall man's height, 
Hopeless of further growth, and brown and sere 
Through half the summer, stands with top cut sheer, 
Like an unshifting weathercock which proves 
How cold the quarter that the wind best loves, 
Or like a Centinel that, evermore 
Darkening the window, ill defends the door 
Of this unfinished house — a Fortress bare, 
Where strength has been the Builder's only care ; 
Whose rugged walls may still for years demand 
The final polish of the Plasterer's hand. 
— This Dwelling's Inmate more than three weeks' 
space 
And oft a Prisoner in the cheerless place, 
I — of whose touch the fiddle would complain, 
Whose breath would labour at the flute in vain, 
In music all unversed, nor blessed with skill 
A bridge to copy, or to paint a mill, 
Tired of my books, a scanty company ! 
And tired of listening to the boisterous sea — 
Pace between door and window muttering rhyme, 
An old resource to cheat a froward time ! 
Though these dull hours (mine is it, or their shame ?) 
Would tempt me to renounce that humble aim. 
— But if there be a Muse who, free to take 
Her seat upon Olympus, doth forsake 

Those heights (like Phoebus when his golden loch 
He veiled, attendant on Thessalian flocks) 
And, in disguise, a Milkmaid with her pail 
Trips down the pathways of some winding dale : 
Or, like a Mermaid, warbles on the shores 
To fishers mending nets beside their doors ; 
Or, Pilgrim-like, on forest moss reclined, 
Gives plaintive ditties to the heedless wind, 
Or listens to its play among the boughs 
Above her head and so forgets her vows — 
If such a Visitant of Earth there be 
And she would deign this day to smile on me 
And aid my verse, content with local bounds 
Of natural beauty and life's daily rounds, 
Thoughts, chances, sights, or doings, which we tel 
Without reserve to those whom we love weli — 
Then haply, Beaumont ! words in current clear 
Will flow, and on a welcome page appear 
Duly before thy sight, unless they perish here. 
What shall I treat of? News from Moua's Isle 
Such have we, but unvaried in its style ; 
No tales of Runagates fresh landed, whence 
And wherefore fugitive or on what pretence ; 
Of feasts, or scandal, eddying like the wind 
Most restlessly alive when most confined. 
Ask not of me, whose tongue can best appease 
The mighty tumults of the House of Keys ; 
The last year's cup whose Ram or Heifer gained, 
What slopes are planted, or what mosses drained 
An eye of fancy only can I cast 
On that proud pageant now at hand or past, 
When full five hundred boats in trim array, 
With nets and sails outspread and streamers gay, 
And chanted hymns and stiller voice of prayer, 
For the old Manx-harvest to the Deep repair, 
Soon as the herring-shoals at distance shine 
Like beds of moonlight shifting on the brint-. 
Mona from our Abode is daily seen, 
But with a wilderness of waves between ; 
And by conjecture only can we speak 
Of aught transacted there in bay or creek ; 
No tidings reach us thence from town or field, 
Only faint news her mountain sunbeams yield, 
And some we gather from the misty air, 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

ind some the hovering clouds, our telegraph, 
declare. 
W these poetic mysteries I withhold ; 
"or Fancy hath her fits both hot and cold, 
L nd should the colder fit with You be on 
Vhen You might read, my credit would be gone. 
Let more substantial themes the pen engage, 
,nd nearer interests culled from the opening stage 
if our migration. — Ere the welcome dawn 
;[ad from the east her silver star withdrawn, 
lie Wain stood ready, at our Cottage-door, 
houghtfully freighted with a various store ; 
.nd long or ere the uprising of the Sun 
''er dew-damped dust our journey was begun, 
. needful journey, under favouring skies, 
hrough peopled Vales ; yet something in the guise 
If those old Patriarchs when from well to well 
hey roamed through Wastes where now the tented 
Arabs dwell. 
Say first, to whom did we the charge confide, 
/ho promptly undertook the Wain to guide 
p many a sharply-twining road and down, 
nd over many a wide hill's craggy crown, 
hrough the quick turns of many a hollow nook, 
nd the rough bed of many an unbridged brook ? 
blooming Lass — who in her better hand 
ore a light switch, her sceptre of command 
/hen, yet a slender Girl, she often led, 
wilful and bold, the horse and burthened sled 
rom the peat-yielding Moss on Gowdar's head, 
'hat could go wrong with such a Charioteer 
or goods and chattels, or those Infants dear, 
l Pair who smilingly sate side by side, 
ur hope confirming that the salt-sea tide, 
''hose free embraces we were bound to seek, 
[ould their lost strength restore and freshen the 
pale cheek ? 
ach hope did either Parent entertain 
acing behind along the silent lane. 
. Blithe hopes and happy musings soon took flight, 
;or lo ! an uncouth melancholy sight — 
n a green bank a creature stood forlorn 
Jst half protruded to the light of morn, 
is hinder part concealed by hedge-row thorn. 
he Figure called to mind a beast of prey 
ript of its frightful powers by slow decay, 
!ud, though no longer upon rapine bent, 
im memory keeping of its old intent. 
r e started, looked again with anxious eyes, 

 A local word for Sledge. 

And in that griesly object recognise 
The Curate's Dog — his long -tried friend, for they, 
As well we knew, together had. grown grey. 
The Master died, his drooping servant's grief 
Found at the Widow's feet some sad relief ; 
Yet still he lived in pining discontent, 
Sadness which no indulgence could prevent ; 
Hence whole day wanderings, broken nightly sleeps 
And lonesome watch that out of doors he keeps ; 
Not oftentimes, I trust, as we, poor brute ! 
Espied him on his legs sustained, blank, mute, 
And of all visible motion destitute, 
So that the very heaving of his breath 
Seemed stopt, though by some other power than 
death. 
Long as we gazed upon the form and face, 
A mild domestic pity kept its place, 
Unscared by thronging fancies of strange hue 
That haunted us in spite of what we knew. 
Even now I sometimes think of him as lost 
In second-sight appearances, or crost 
By spectral shapes of guilt, or to the ground, 
On which he stood, by spells unnatural bound, 
Like a gaunt shaggy Porter forced to wait 
In days of old romance at Archimago's gate. 
Advancing Summer, Nature's law fulfilled, 
The choristers in every grove had stilled ; 
But we, we lacked not music of our own, 
For lightsome Fanny had thus early thrown, 
Mid the gay prattle of those infant tongues, 
Some notes prelusive, from the round of songs 
With which, more zealous than the liveliest bird 
That in wild Arden's brakes was ever heard, 
Her work and her work's partners she can cheer, 
The whole day long, and all days of the year. 
Thus gladdened from our own dear Vale we pass 
And soon approach Diana's Looking-glass ! 
To Loughrigg-tarn, round clear and bright as 
heaven, 
Such name Italian fancy would have given, 
Ere on its banks the few grey cabins rose 
That yet disturb not its concealed repose 
More than the feeblest wind that idly blows. 
Ah, Beaumont ! when an opening in the road 
Stopped me at once by charm of what it showed, 
The encircling region vividly exprest 
Within the mirror's depth, a world at rest — 
Sky streaked with purple, grove and craggy bield , 
And the smooth green of many a pendent field, 
 A word common in the country, signifying shelter, as 
in Scotland. 


 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

And, quieted and soothed, a torrent small, 
A little daring would-be waterfall, 
One chimney smoking and its azure wreath, 
Associate all in the calm Pool beneath, 
With here and there a faint imperfect gleam 
Of water-lilies veiled in misty steam — 
What wonder at this hour of stillness deep, 
A shadowy link 'tween wakefulness and sleep, 
When Nature's self, amid such blending, seems 
To render visible her own soft dreams, 
If, mixed with what appeared of rock, lawn, wood, 
Fondly embosomed in the tranquil flood, 
A glimpse I caught of that Abode, by Thee 
Designed to rise in humble privacy, 
A lowly Dwelling, here to be outspread, 
Like a small Hamlet, with its bashful head 
Half hid in native trees. Alas 'tis not, 
Nor ever was ; I sighed, and left the spot 
Unconscious of its own untoward lot, 
And thought in silence, with regret too keen, 
Of unexperienced joys that might have been ; 
Of neighbourhood and intermingling arts, 
And golden summer days uniting cheerful hearts. 
But time, irrevocable time, is flown, 
And let us utter thanks for blessings sown 
And reaped — what hath been, and what is, our own. 
Not far we travelled ere a shout of glee, 
Startling us all, dispersed my reverie ; 
Such shout as many a sportive echo meeting 
Oft-times from Alpine chalets sends a greeting. 
Whence the blithe hail ? behold a Peasant stand 
On high, a kerchief waving in her hand ! 
Not unexpectant that by early day 
Our little Band would thrid this mountain way, 
Before her cottage on the bright hill side 
She hath advanced with hope to be descried. 
Right gladly answering signals we displayed, 
Moving along a tract of morning shade, 
And vocal wishes sent of like good will 
To our kind Friend high on the sunny hill — 
Luminous region, fair as if the prime 
Were tempting all astir to look aloft or climb ; 
Only the centre of the shining cot 
With door left open makes a gloomy spot, 
Emblem of those dark corners sometimes found 
Within the happiest breast on earthly ground. 
Rich prospect left behind of stream and vale, 
And mountain-tops, a barren ridge we scale ; 
Descend and reach, in Yewdale's depths, a plain 
With haycocks studded, striped with yellowing 
grain — 
An area level as a Lake and spread 

Under a rock too steep for man to tread, 
Where sheltered from the north and bleak north- 
west 
Aloft the Raven hangs a visible nest, 
Fearless of all assaults that would her brood molest 
Hot sunbeams fill the steaming vale ; but hark 
At our approach, a jealous watch-dog's bark, 
Noise that brings forth no liveried Page of state 
But the whole household, that our coming wait. 
With Young and Old warm greetings we exchange 
And jocund smiles, and toward the lowly Grange 
Press forward by the teasing dogs unscared. 
Entering, we find the morning meal prepared : 
So down we sit, though not till each had cast 
Pleased looks around the delicate repast — 
Rich cream, and snow-white eggs fresh from th< 
nest, 
With amber honey from the mountain's breast ; 
Strawberries from lane or woodland, offering wilt 
Of children's industry, in hillocks piled ; 
Cakes for the nonce, and butter fit to he 
Upon a lordly dish ; frank hospitality 
Where simple art with bounteous nature vied, 
And cottage comfort shunned not seemly pride. 
Kind Hostess ! Handmaid also of the feast, 
If thou be lovelier than the kindling East, 
Words by thy presence unrestrained may speak 
Of a perpetual dawn from brow and cheek 
Instinct with light whose sweetest promise lies, 
Never retiring, in thy large dark eyes, 
Dark but to every gentle feeling true, 
As if their lustre flowed from ether's purest blue 
Let me not ask what tears may have been wep 
By those bright eyes, what weary vigils kept, 
Beside that hearth what sighs may have beei 
heaved 
For wounds inflicted, nor what toil relieved 
By fortitude and patience, and the grace 
Of heaven in pity visiting the place. 
Not unadvisedly those secret springs 
I leave unsearched : enough that memory dings. 
Here as elsewhere, to notices that make 
Their own significance for hearts awake, 
To rural incidents, whose genial powers 
Filled with delight three summer morning hours 
More could my pen report of grave or gay 
That through our gipsy travel cheered the way ; 
But, bursting forth above the waves, the Sun 
Laughs at my pains, and seems to say, "Be doni'. 
Yet, Beaumont, thou wilt not, I trust, reprove 
This humble offering made by Truth to Love, 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

■for chide the Muse that stooped to break a spell 
Vhich might have else been on me yet : — 
Farewell. 

UPON PERUSING THE FOREGOING EPISTLE THIRTY 
TEARS AFTER ITS COMPOSITION. 
iOon did the Almighty Giver of all rest 
'ake those dear young Ones to a fearless nest ; 
L nd in Death's arms has long reposed the Friend 
or whom this simple Register was penned. 
'hanks to the moth that spared it for our eyes ; 
Lnd Strangers even the slighted Scroll may prize, 
loved by the touch of kindred sympathies. 
'or — gave the calm, repentance sheds o'er strife 
Raised by remembrances of misused life, 
'he light from past endeavours purely willed 
■jid by Heaven's favour happily fulfilled ; 
ave hope that we, yet bound to Earth, may share 
he joys of the Departed — what so fair 
Is blameless pleasure, not without some tears, 
leviewed through Love's transparent veil of years ? 
' Note, — Loughrigg Tarn, alluded to in the foregoing 
pistle, resembles, though much smaller in compass, the 
ake Nemi, or Speculum Diana: as it is often called, not 
dy in its clear waters and circular form, and the beauty 
amediately surrounding it, but also as being overlooked 
•! the eminence of Langdale Pikes as Lake Nemi is by 
: iat of Monte Calvo. Since this Epistle was written 
jughrigg Tarn has lost much of its beauty by the felling 
many natural clumps of wood, relics of the old forest, 
iirticularly upon the farm called " The Oaks," from the 
mndance of that tree which grew there. 
It is to be regretted, upon public grounds, that Sir George 
eaumont did not carry into effect his intention of con- 
flicting here a Summer Retreat in the style I have 
scribed ; as his taste would have set an example how 
lildings, with all the accommodations modern society 
quires, might be introduced even into the most secluded 
irts of this country without injuring their native cha- 
pter. The design was not abandoned from failure of 
,clination on his part, but in consequence of local unto- 
wdnesses which need not be particularised. 

iOLD AND SILVER FISHES IN A VASE, 
' The soaring lark is blest as proud 
When at heaven's gate she sings ; 
The roving bee proclaims aloud 
Her flight by vocal wings ; 
i While Ye, in lasting durance pent, 
Your silent lives employ 
For something more than dull content, 
Though haply less than joy. 

Yet might your glassy prison seem 
A place where joy is known, 
Where golden flash and silver gleam 
Have meanings of their own ; 
While, high and low, and all about, 
Your motions, glittering Elves ! 
Ye weave — no danger from without, 
And peace among yourselves. 
Type of a sunny human breast 
Is your transparent cell ; 
Where Fear is but a transient guest, 
No sullen Humours dwell ; 
Where, sensitive of every ray 
That smites this tiny sea, 
Your scaly panoplies repay 
The loan with usury. 
How beautiful ! — Yet none knows why 
This ever-graceful change, 
Renewed — renewed incessantly — 
Within your quiet range. 
Is it that ye with conscious skill 
For mutual pleasure glide ; 
And sometimes, not without your will, 
Are dwarfed, or magnified ? 
Fays, Genii of gigantic size ! 
And now, in twilight dim, 
Clustering like constellated eyes, 
In wings of Cherubim, 
When the fierce orbs abate their glare ; — 
Whate'er your forms express, 
Whate'er ye seem, whate'er ye are — ■ 
All leads to gentleness. 
Cold though your nature be, 'tis pure ; 
Your birthright is a fence 
From all that haughtier kinds endure 
Through tyranny of sense. 
Ah ! not alone by colours bright  
Are Ye to heaven allied, 
When, like essential Forms of light, 
Ye mingle, or divide. 
For day-dreams soft as e'er beguiled 
Day-thoughts while limbs repose ; 
For moonlight fascinations mild, 
Your gift, ere shutters close — 
Accept, mute Captives ! thanks and praise ; 
And may this tribute prove 
That gentle admirations raise 
Delight resembling love. WU. 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

LIBERTY. 
(sequel to the above.) 
[addressed to a friend ; THE gold and silver fishes 
HAVING BEEN REMOVED TO A FOOL IN THE PLEASURE- 
GROUND OF RYDAL MOUNT.] 
' The liberty of a people consists in being governed by laws 
which they have made for themselves, under whatever 
form it be of government. The liberty of a privateman, 
in being master of his own time and actions, as far as 
may consist with the laws of God and of his country. 
Of this latter we are here to discourse.'— Cowley. 
Those breathing Tokens of your kind regard, 
(Suspect not, Anna, that their fate is hard ; 
Not soon does aught to which mild fancies cling 
In lonely spots, become a slighted thing ;) 
Those silent Inmates now no longer share, 
Nor do they need, our hospitable care, 
Removed in kindness from their glassy Cell 
To the fresh waters of a living Well — 
An elfin pool so sheltered that its rest 
No winds disturb ; the mirror of whose breast 
Is smooth as clear, save where with dimples small 
A fly may settle, or a blossom fall. 
— There swims, of blazing sun and beating shower 
Fearless (but how obscured !) the golden Power, 
That from his bauble prison used to cast 
Gleams by the richest jewel unsurpast ; 
And near him, darkling like a sullen Gnome, 
The silver Tenant of the crystal dome ; 
Dissevered both from all the mysteries 
Of hue and altering shape that charmed all eyes. 
Alas ! they pined, they languished while they shone ; 
And, if not so, what matters beauty gone 
And admiration lost, by change of place 
That brings to the inward creature no disgrace ? 
But if the change restore his birthright, then, 
Whate'er the difference, boundless is the gain. 
Who can divine what impulses from God 
Reach the caged lark, within a town-abode, 
From his poor inch or two of daisied sod ? 
yield him back his privilege ! — No sea 
Swells like the bosom of a man set free ; 
A wilderness is rich with liberty. 
Roll on, ye spouting whales, who die or keep 
Your independence in the fathomless Deep ! 
Spread, tiny nautilus, the living sail ; 
Dive, at thy choice, or brave the freshening gale ! 
If unreproved the ambitious eagle mount 
Sunward to seek the daylight in its fount, 
Bays, gulfs, and ocean's Indian width, shall be, 
Till the world perishes, a field for thee ! 

While musing here I sit in shadow cool, 
And watch these mute Companions, in the pool, 
(Among reflected boughs of leafy trees) 
By glimpses caught — disporting at their ease, 
Enlivened, braced, by hardy luxuries, 
I ask what warrant fixed them (like a spell 
Of witchcraft fixed them) in the crystal cell ; 
To wheel with languid motion round and round, 
Beautiful, yet in mournful durance bound. 
Their peace, perhaps, our lightest footfall marred 
On their quick sense our sweetest music jarreii ; 
And whither could they dart, if seized with fear > 
No sheltering stone, no tangled root was near. 
When fire or taper ceased to cheer the room, 
They wore away the night in starless gloom ; 
And, when the sun first dawned upon the streams 
How faint their portion of his vital beams ! 
Thus, and unable to complain, they fared, 
While not one joy of ours by them was shared. 
Is there a cherished bird (I venture now 
To snatch a sprig from Chaucer's reverend brow)- 
Is there a brilliant fondling of the cage, 
Though sure of plaudits on his costly stage, 
Though fed with dainties from the snow-white ham 
Of a kind mistress, fairest of the land, 
But gladly would escape ; and. if need were, 
Scatter the colours from the plumes that bear 
The emancipated captive through blithe air 
Into strange woods, where he at large may live 
On best or worst which they and Nature give ? 
The beetle loves his unpretending track, 
The snail the house he carries on his back ; 
The far-fetched worm with pleasure would disow 
The bed we give him, though of softest down ; 
A noble instinct ; in all kinds the same, 
All ranks ! What Sovereign, worthy of the name 
If doomed to breathe against his lawful will 
An element that flatters him — to kill, 
But would rejoice to barter outward show 
For the least boon that freedom can bestow? 
But most the Bard is true to inborn right, 
Lark of the dawn, and Philomel of night, 
Exults in freedom, can with rapture vouch 
For the dear blessings of a lowly couch, 
A natural meal— days, months, from Nature's hand 
Time, place, and business, all at his command !- 
Who bends to happier duties, who more wise 
Than the industrious Poet, taught to prize, 
Above all grandeur, a pure life uncrossed 
By cares in which simplicity is lost ? 
That life— the flowery path that winds by stealth- 
Which Horace needed for his spirit's health ; 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

iighed for, in heart and genius, overcome 
y noise and strife, and questions wearisome, 
nd the vain splendours of Imperial Rome? — 
iet easy mirth his social hours inspire, 
nd fiction animate his sportive lyre, 
ttuned to verse that, crowning light Distress 
r ith garlands, cheats her into happiness ; 
ive me the humblest note of those sad strains 
rawn forth by pressure of his gilded chains, 
is a chance-sunbeam from his memory fell 
jpon the Sabine farm he loved so well ; 
r when the prattle of Blandusia's spring 
aunted his ear — he only listening — 
e proud to please, above all rivals, fit 
) win the palm of gaiety and wit ; 
je, doubt not, with involuntary dread, 
irinking from each new favour to be shed, 
y the world's Rider, on his honoured head ! 
In a deep vision's intellectual scene, 
,ich earnest longings and regrets as keen 
ppressed the melancholy Cowley, laid 
bder a fancied yew-tree's luckless shade ; 
, doleful bower for penitential song, 
here Man and Muse complained of mutual wrong ; 
pile Cam's ideal current glided by, 
iid antique towers nodded their foreheads high, 
itadels dear to studious privacy. 
it Fortune, who had long been used to sport 
lith this tried Servant of a thankless Court, 
Renting met his wishes ; and to you 
Ie remnant of his days at least was true ; 
u, whom, though long deserted, he loved best ; 
u, Muses, books, fields, liberty, and rest ! 
l&v happier they who, fixing hope and aim 
the humanities of peaceful fame, 
.iter betimes with more than martial fire 
le generous course, aspire, and still aspire ; 
iheld by warnings heeded not too late 
i fle the contradictions of their fate, 
id to one purpose cleave, their Being's godlike 
mate! 

bus, gifted Friend, but with the placid brow 
woman ne'er should forfeit, keep thy vow ; 
ith modest scorn reject whate'er would blind 
e ethereal eyesight, cramp the winged mind ! 
en, with a blessing granted from above 
every act, word, thought, and look of love, 
'e's book for Thee may he unclosed, till age 
all with a thankful tear bedrop its latest page . 
. 
There is now, alas ! no possibility of the anticipation, 
•h which the above Epistle concludes, being realised : 

POOR ROBIN. 
Now when the primrose makes a splendid show, 
And lilies face the March-winds in full blow, 
And humbler growths as moved with one desire 
Put on, to welcome spring, their best attire, 
Poor Robin is yet flowerless ; but how gay 
With his red stalks upon this sunny day ! 
And, as his tufts of leaves he spreads, content 
With a hard bed and scanty nourishment, 
Mixed with the green, some shine not lacking power 
To rival summer's brightest scarlet flower ; 
And flowers they well might seem to passers-by 
If looked at only with a careless eye ; 
Flowers — or a richer produce (did it suit 
The season) sprinklings of ripe strawberry fruit. 
But while a thousand pleasures come unsought, 
Why fix upon his wealth or want a thought ? 
Is the string touched in prelude to a lay 
Of pretty fancies that would round him play 
When all the world acknowledged elfin sway ? 
Or does it suit our humour to commend 
Poor Robin as a sure and crafty friend, 
Whose practice teaches, spite of names to show 
Bright colours whether they deceive or no ? — 
Nay, we would simply praise the free good-will 
With which, though slighted, he, on naked hill 
Or in warm valley, seeks his part to fill ; 
Cheerful alike if bare of flowers as now, 
Or when his tiny gems shall deck his brow : 
Yet more, we wish that men by men despised, 
And such as lift their foreheads overprized, 
Should sometimes think, where'er they chance to spy 
This child of Nature's own humility, 

nor were the verses ever seen by the Individual for whom 
they were intended. She accompanied her husband, the 
Rev. Wm. Fletcher, to India, and died oi cholera, at 
the age of thirty-two or thirty-three years, on her way 
from Shalapore to Bombay, deeply lamented by all who 
knew her. 
Her enthusiasm was ardent, her piety steadfast ; and her 
great talents would have enabled her to be eminently useful 
in the difficult path of life to which she had been called. 
The opinion she entertained of her own performances, 
given to the world under her maiden name, Jewsbury, was 
modest and humble, and, indeed, far below their merits ; 
as is often the case with those who are making trial of 
their powers, with a hope to discover what they are best 
fitted for. In one quality, viz., quickness in the motions of 
her mind, she had, within the range of the Author's 
acquaintance, no equal. 
 The small wild Geranium known by that name. 


 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

What recompense is kept in store or left 
For all that seem neglected or bereft ; 
With what nice care equivalents are given, 
How just, how bountiful, the hand of Heaven. 
March,  

THE GLEANER. 
(SUGGESTED BY A PICTDBE.) 
That happy gleam of vernal eyes, 
Those locks from summer's golden skies, 
That o'er thy brow are shed ; 
That cheek — a kindling of the morn, 
That lip — a rose-bud from the thorn, 
I saw ; and Fancy sped 
To scenes Arcadian, whispering, through soft air, 
Of bliss that grows without a care, 
And happiness that never flies — 
(How can it where love never dies ?) 
Whispering of promise, where no blight 
Can reach the innocent delight ; 
Where pity, to the mind conveyed 
In pleasure, is the darkest shade 
That Time, unwrinkled grandsire, flings 
From his smoothly gliding wings. 
What mortal form, what earthly face 
Inspired the pencil, lines to trace, 
And mingle colours, that should breed 
Such rapture, nor want power to feed ; 
For had thy charge been idle flowers, 
Fair Damsel ! o'er my captive mind, 
To truth and sober reason blind, 
'Mid that soft air, those long-lost bowers, 
The sweet illusion might have hung, for hours. 
Thanks to this tell-tale sheaf of corn, 
That touchingly bespeaks thee born 
Life's daily tasks with them to share 
Who, whether from their lowly bed 
They rise, or rest the weary head, 
Ponder the blessing they entreat 
From Heaven, and feel what they repeat, 
While they give utterance to the prayer 
That asks for daily bread. 

TO A REDBREAST— (IN SICKNESS). 
Stay, little cheerful Robin ! stay, 
And at my casement sing, 
Though it should prove a farewell lay 
And this our parting spring. 
Though I, alas ! may ne'er enjoy 
The promise in thy song ; 
A charm, that thought can not destroy. 
Doth to thy strain belong. 
Methinks that in my dying hour 
Thy song would still be dear, 
And with a more than earthly power 
My passing Spirit cheer. 
Then, little Bird, this boon confer, 
Come, and my requiem sing, 
Nor fail to be the harbinger 
Of everlasting Spring. 

VII. 
FLOATING ISLAND. 

These lines are by the Author of the Address to ti 
Wind, &c. published heretofore along with ray Poem 
The above to a Redbreast are by a deceased female ReL 
tive. 
Harmonious Powers with Nature work 
On sky, earth, river, lake and sea ; 
Sunshine and cloud, whirlwind and breeze, 
All in one duteous task agree. 
Once did I see a slip of earth 
(By throbbing waves long undermined) 
Loosed from its hold ; how, no one knew, 
But all might see it float, obedient to the win'] ; 
Might see it, from the mossy shore 
Dissevered, float upon the Lake, 
Float with its crest of trees adorned 
On which the warbling birds then- pastime take. 
Food, shelter, safety, there they find ; 
There berries ripen, flowerets bloom ; 
There insects live their lives, and die ; 
A peopled world it is ; in size a tiny room. 
And thus through many seasons' space 
This little Island may survive ; 
But Nature, though we mark her not, 
Will take away, may cease to give. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

•reliance when you are wandering forth 
ipon some vacant sunny day, 
ithout an object, hope, or fear, 
lither your eyes may turn — the Isle is passed 
away; 
iried beneath the glittering Lake, 
. place no longer to be found ; 
:t the lost fragments shall remain 
fertilize some other ground. 
D. W. 

' late, late yestreen I saw the new moone 
Wi' the auld moone in hir arme.' 
Ballad of Sir Patrick Spence, Percy's Reliques. 
• ce I could hail (howe'er serene the sky) 
' e Moon re-entering her monthly round, 
\ faculty yet given me to espy 
'  dusky Shape within her arms imbound, 
it thin memento of effulgence lost 
 lich some have named her Predecessor's ghost. 
 ang, like the Crescent that above me shone, 
. ight I perceived within it dull or dim ; 
-■ that appeared was suitable to One 
\iose fancy had a thousand fields to skim ; 
 expectations spreading with wild growth, 
l\ hope that kept with me her plighted troth. 
 w (ambition quickening at the view) 
i ilver boat launched on a boundless flood ; 
i early crest, like Dian's when it threw 
I brightest splendour round a leafy wood ; 
I not a hint from under-ground, no sign 
I for the glimmering brow of Proserpine. 
C was it Dian's self that seemed to move 
I ire me ? — nothing blemished the fair sight ; 
C her I looked whom jocund Fairies love, 
C tliia, who puts the little stars to flight, 
A', by that thinning magnifies the great, 
I exaltation of her sovereign state. 
when I learned to mark the spectral Shape 
v ach new Moon obeyed the call of Time, 
oom fell on me, swift was my escape ; 
S i happy privilege hath life's gay Prime, 
Ipee or not to see, as best may please 
loyant Spirit, and a heart at ease. 
 N , dazzling Stranger ! when thou meet'st my 
glance, 
dark Associate ever I discern ; 


Emblem of thoughts too eager to advance 
While I salute my joys, thoughts sad or stern ; 
Shades of past bliss, or phantoms that, to gain 
Their fill of promised lustre, wait in vain. 
So changes mortal Life with fleeting years ; 
A mournful change, should Reason fail to bring 
The timely insight that can temper fears, 
And from vicissitude remove its sting ; 
While Faith aspires to seats in that domain 
Where joys are perfect — neither wax nor wane. 
«. 

TO THE LADY FLEMING, 
ON SEEING THE FOUNDATION PREPARING FOR THE EREC- 
TION OF RTDAL CHAPEL, WESTMORELAND. 

Blest is this Isle — our native Land ; 
Where battlement and moated gate 
Are objects only for the hand 
Of hoary Time to decorate ; 
Where shady hamlet, town that breathes 
Its busy smoke in social wreaths, 
No rampart's stern defence require, 
Nought but the heaven-directed spire, 
And steeple tower (with pealing bells 
Far-heard) — our only citadels. 
ii. 
Lady ! from a noble line 
Of chieftains sprung, who stoutly bore 
The spear, yet gave to works divine 
A bounteous help in days of yore, 
(As records mouldering in the Dell 
Of Nightshade haply yet may tell ;) 
Thee kindred aspirations moved 
To build, within a vale beloved, 
For Him upon whose high behests 
All peace depends, all safety rests. 
in. 
How fondly will the woods embrace 
This daughter of thy pious care, 
Lifting her front with modest grace 
To make a fair recess more fair ; 
And to exalt the passing hour ; 
Or soothe it with a healing power 
Drawn from the Sacrifice fulfilled, 
Before this rugged soil was tilled, 
Or human habitation rose 
To interrupt the deep repose ! 

 Bekangs Ghyll— or the dell of Nightshade— in which 
stands St. Mary's Abbey in Low Furness. 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

Well may the villagers rejoice ! 
Nor heat, nor cold, nor weary ways, 
Will be a hindrance to the voice 
That would unite in prayer and praise ; 
More duly shall wild wandering Youth 
Receive the curb of sacred truth, 
Shall tottering Age, bent earthward, hear 
The Promise, with uplifted ear ; 
And all shall welcome the new ray 
Imparted to their sabbath-day. 
V. 
Nor deem the Poet's hope misplaced, 
His fancy cheated — that can see 
A shade upon the future cast, 
Of time's pathetic sanctity ; 
Can hear the monitory clock 
Sound o'er the lake with gentle shock 
At evening, when the ground beneath 
Is ruffled o'er with cells of death ; 
Where happy generations lie, 
Here tutored for eternity. 
VI. 
Lives there a man whose sole delights 
Are trivial pomp and city noise, 
Hardening a heart that loathes or slights 
What every natural heart enjoys ? 
Who never caught a noon-tide dream 
From murmur of a running stream ; 
Could strip, for aught the prospect yields 
To him, their verdure from the fields ; 
And take the radiance from the clouds 
In which the sun his setting shrouds. 

A soul so pitiably forlorn, 
If such do on this earth abide, 
May season apathy with scorn, 
May turn indifference to pride ; 
And still be not unblest — compared 
With him who grovels, self-debarred 
From all that lies within the scope 
Of holy faith and christian hope ; 
Or, shipwreck'd, kindles on the coast 
False fires, that others may be lost. 
VIII. 
Alas ! that such perverted zeal 
Should spread on Britain's favoured ground ! 
That public order, private weal, 
Should e'er have felt or feared a wound 
From champions of the desperate law 
Which from their own blind hearts they draw ; 

Who tempt their reason to deny 
God, whom their passions dare defy, 
And boast that they alone are free 
Who reach this dire extremity ! 
IX. 
But turn we from these ' bold bad ' men ; 
Tiie way, mild Lady ! that hath led 
Down to their ' dark opprobrious den,' 
Is all too rough for Thee to tread. 
Softly as morning vapours glide 
Down Rydal-cove from Fairfield's side, 
Should move the tenor of his song 
Who means to charity no wrong ; 
Whose offering gladly would accord 
With this day's work, in thought and word. 
X. 
Heaven prosper it ! may peace, and love, 
And hope, and consolation, fall, 
Through its meek influence, from above, 
And penetrate the hearts of all ; 
All who, around the hallowed Fane, 
Shall sojourn in this fair domain ; 
Grateful to Thee, while service pure, 
And ancient ordinance, shall endure, 
For opportunity bestowed 
To kneel together, and adore their God ! 

ON THE SAME OCCASION. 
Oh ! gather whencesoe'er ye safely may 
The help which slackening Piety requirea; 
Nor deem that he perforce must go astray 
Who treads upon the footmarks of his sire. 

Our churches, invariably perhaps, stand east ard wisl 
hut why is by few persons exactly known ; nor, ilia 
the degree of deviation from due east often noticeabl 
in the ancient ones was determined, in each parttcull 
case, by the point in the horizon, at which the sun r»s 
upon the day of the saint to whom the church »a 
dedicated. These observances of our anoesto 
the causes of them, are the subject of the foBowir 
stanzas. 
When in the antique age of bow and spear 
And feudal rapine clothed with iron mail, 
Came ministers of peace, intent to rear 
The Mother Church in yon sequestered vale ; 
Then, to her Patron Saint a previous rite 
Resounded with deep swell and solemn close, 
Through unremitting vigils of the night, 
Till from his couch the wished-for Sun uprose. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

e rose, and straight— as by divine command, 
hey, who had waited for that sign to trace 
leir work's foundation, gave with careful hand 
i the high altar its determined place ; 
indful of Him who in the Orient born 
,ere lived, and on the cross his life resigned, 
id who, from out the regions of the morn, 
uing in pomp, shall come to judge mankind. 
taught their creed ; — nor failed the eastern sky, 
id these more awful feelings, to infuse 
e sweet and natural hopes that shall not die, 
ng as the sun his gladsome course renews. 
r us hath such prelusive vigil ceased ; 
t still we plant, like men of elder days 
• r christian altar faithful to the east, 
' aence the tall window drinks the morning rays ; 
'. at obvious emblem giving to the eye 
(meek devotion, which erewhile it gave, 
tit symbol of the day-spring from on high, 
'Jumphant o'er the darkness of the grave. 

THE HORN OF EGREMONT CASTLE. 
Is the Brothers through the gateway 
Iiied forth with old and young, 
 the Horn Sir Eustace pointed 
Yich for ages there had hung, 
I|rn it was which none could sound, 
£ one upon living ground, 
 e He who came as rightful Heir 
lEgremont's Domains and Castle fair. 
I rs from times of earliest record 
II the House of Lucie born, 
T o of right had held the Lordship 
C med by proof upon the Horn : 
Eh at the appointed hour 
 |.-d the Horn, — it owned his power ; 
 was acknowledged : and the blast, 
V ich good Sir Eustace sounded, was the last. 
^ h his lance Sir Eustace pointed, 
A to Hubert thus said he, 
'" hat I speak this Horn shall witness 
E| thy better memory. 
«ir, then, and neglect me not ! 
A his time, and on this spot, 
H words are uttered from my heart, 
Amy last earnest prayer ere we depart. 

On good service we are going 
Life to risk by sea and land, 
In which course if Christ our Saviour 
Do my sinful soul demand, 
Hither come thou back straightway, 
Hubert, if alive that day ; 
Return, and sound the Horn, that we 
May have a living House still left in thee I" 
" Fear not," quickly answered Hubert ; 
" As I am thy Father's son, 
What thou askest, noble Brother, 
With God's favour shall be done." 
So were both right well content : 
Forth they from the Castle went, 
And at the head of their Array 
To Palestine the Brothers took their way. 
Side by side they fought (the Lucies 
Were a line for valour famed) 
And where'er their strokes alighted, 
There the Saracens were tamed. 
Whence, then, could it come— -the thought — 
By what evil spirit brought ? 
Oh ! can a brave Man wish to take 
His Brother's life, for Lands' and Castle's sake ? 
" Sir ! " the Puiffians said to Hubert, 
" Deep he lies in Jordan flood. " 
Stricken by this ill assurance, 
Pale and trembling Hubert stood. 
" Take your earnings."— Oh ! that I 
Could have seen my Brother die ! 
It was a pang that vexed him then ; 
And oft returned, again, and yet again. 
Months passed on, and no Sir Eustace ! 
Nor of him were tidings heard. 
Wherefore, bold as day, the Murderer 
Back again to England steered. 
To his Castle Hubert sped ; 
Nothing has he now to dread. 
But silent and by stealth he came, 
And at an hour which nobody could name. 
None could tell if it were night-time, 
Night or day, at even or morn ; 
No one's eye had seen him enter, 
No one's ear had heard the Horn. 
But bold Hubert lives in glee : 
Months and years went smilingly ; 
With plenty was his table spread ; 
And bright the Lady is who shares his bed. 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

Likewise he had sons and daughters ; 
And, as good men do, he sate 
At his board by these surrounded, 
Flourishing in fair estate. 
And while thus in open day 
Once he sate, as old books say, 
A blast was uttered from the Horn, 
Where by the Castle-gate it hung forlorn. 
'Tis the breath of good Sir Eustace ! 
He is come to claim his right : 
Ancient castle, woods, and mountains 
Hear the challenge with delight. 
Hubert ! though the blast be blown 
He is helpless and alone : 
Thou hast a dungeon, speak the word ! 
And there he may be lodged, and thou be Lord. 
Speak ! — astounded Hubert cannot ; 
And, if power to speak he had, 
All are daunted, all the household 
Smitten to the heart, and sad. 
'Tis Sir Eustace ; if it be 
Living man, it must be he ! 
Thus Hubert thought in his dismay, 
And by a postern-gate he slunk away. 
Long, and long was he unheard of : 
To his Brother then he came, 
Made confession, asked forgiveness, 
Asked it by a brother's name, 
And by all the saints in heaven ; 
And of Eustace was forgiven : 
Then in a convent went to hide 
His melancholy head, and there he died. 
But Sir Eustace, whom good angels 
Had preserved from murderers' hands, 
And from Pagan chains had rescued, 
Lived with honour on his lands. 
Sons he had, saw sons of theirs : 
And through ages, heirs of heirs, 
A long posterity renowned, 
Sounded the Horn which they alone could sound. 
. 

GOODY BLAKE AND HARRY GILL. 
A TRUE STORY. 
Oh ! what's the matter? what's the matter? 
What is 't that ails young Harry Gill ? 
That evermore his teeth they chatter, 
Chatter, chatter, chatter still ! 

Of waistcoats Harry has no lack, 
Good duffle grey, and flannel fine ; 
He has a blanket on his back, 
And coats enough to smother nine. 
In March, December, and in July, 
'Tis all the same with Harry Gill ; 
The neighbours tell, and tell you truly, 
His teeth they chatter, chatter still. 
At night, at morning, and at noon, 
'Tis all the same with Harry Gill ; 
Beneath the sun, beneath the moon, 
His teeth they chatter, chatter still ! 
Young Harry was a lusty drover, 
And who so stout of limb as he ? 
His cheeks were red as ruddy clover ; 
His voice was like the voice of three. 
Old Goody Blake was old and poor ; 
 fed she was, and thinly clad ; 
And any man who passed her door 
Might see how poor a hut she had. 
All day she spun in her poor dwelling : 
And then her three hours' work at night, 
Alas ! 'twas hardly worth the telling, 
It would not pay for candle-light. 
Remote from sheltered village-green, 
On a hill's northern side she dwelt, 
Where from sea-blasts the hawthorns lean. 
And hoary dews are slow to melt. 
By the same fire to boil their pottage, 
Two poor old Dames, as I have known, 
Will often live in one small cottage ; 
But she, poor Woman ! housed alone. 
'Twas well enough when summer came, 
The long, warm, lightsome summer-day, 
Then at her door the canty Dame 
Would sit, as any linnet, gay. 
But when the ice our streams did fetter, 
Oh then how her old bones would shake ! 
You would have said, if you had met her, 
'Twas a hard time for Goody Blake. 
Her evenings then were dull and dead : 
Sad case it was, as you may think, 
For very cold to go to bed ; 
And then for cold not sleep a wink. 
O joy for her ! whene'er in winter 
The winds at night had made a rout ; 
And scattered many a lusty splinter 
And many a rotten bough about. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

?. 

Yet never had she, well or sick, 
i As every man who knew her says, 
A pile beforehand, turf or stick, 
Enough to warm her for three days. 
Now, when the frost was past enduring, 
And made her poor old bones to ache, 
Could any thing be more alluring 
Than an old hedge to Goody Blake ? 
, And, now and then, it must be said, 
When her old bones were cold and chill, 
She left her fire, or left her bed, 
To seek the hedge of Harry Gill. 
Now Harry he had long suspected 
This trespass of old Goody Blake ; 
And vowed that she should be detected — 
That he on her would vengeance take. 
And oft from his warm fire he 'd go, 
And to the fields his road would take ; 
And there, at night, in frost and snow, 
He watched to seize old Goody Blake. 
And once, behind a rick of barley, 
Thus looking out did Harry stand : 
The moon was full and shining clearly, 
And crisp with frost the stubble land. 
—He hears a noise — he 's all awake — 
Again % — on tip-toe down the hill 
He softly creeps — 'tis Goody Blake; 
She 's at the hedge of Harry Gill ! 
flight glad was he when he beheld her : 
stick after stick did Goody pull : 
He stood behind a bush of elder, 
Till she had filled her apron full. 
iVhen with her load she turned about, 
The by-way back again to take ; 
le started forward, with a shout, 
^.nd sprang upon poor Goody Blake. 
Ind fiercely by the arm he took her, 
ind by the arm he held her fast, 
ind fiercely by the arm he shook her, 
And cried, "I've caught you then at last !" 
'hen Goody, who had nothing said, 
ler bundle from her lap let fall ; 
aid, kneeling on the sticks, she prayed 
'o God that is the judge of all. 
,he prayed, her withered hand uprearing, 
i^hile Harry held her by the arm- 
God ! who art never out of hearing, 
may he never more be warm ! " 

The cold, cold moon above her head, 
Thus on her knees did Goody pray ; 
Young Harry heard what she had said : 
And icy cold he turned away. 
He went complaining all the morrow 
That he was cold and very chill : 
His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow, 
Alas ! that day for Harry Gill ! 
That day he wore a riding-coat, 
But not a whit the warmer he : 
Another was on Thursday brought, 
And ere the Sabbath he had three. 
'Twas all in vain, a useless matter, 
And blankets were about him pinned ; 
Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter, 
Like a loose casement in the wind. 
And Harry's flesh it fell away ; 
And all who see him say, 'tis plain, 
That, live as long as live he may, 
He never will be warm again. 
No word to any man he utters, 
A-bed or up, to young or old ; 
But ever to himself he mutters, 
"Poor Harry Gill is very cold." 
A-bed or up, by night or day ; 
His teeth they chatter, chatter still. 
Now think, ye farmers all, I pray, 
Of Goody Blake and Harry GUI ! 

. 

PEELUDE, 
PREFIXED TO THE VOLUME ENTITLED " POEMS CHIEFLY 
OF EARLY AND LATE TEARS." 
In desultory walk through orchard grounds, 
Or some deep chestnut grove, oft have I paused 
The while a Thrush, urged rather than restrained 
By gusts of vernal storm, attuned his song 
To his own genial instincts ; and was heard 
(Though not without some plaintive tones between) 
To utter, above showers of blossom swept 
From tossing boughs, the promise of a calm, 
Which the unsheltered traveller might receive 
With thankful spirit. The descant, and the wind 
That seemed to play with it in love or scorn, 
Encouraged and endeared the strain of words 
That haply flowed from me, by fits of silence 
Impelled to livelier pace. But now, my Book ! 
Charged with those lays, and others of like mood, 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

Or loftier pitch if higher rose the theme. 
Go, single — yet aspiring to be joined 
With thy Forerunners that through many a year 
Have faithfully prepared each other's way — 
Go forth upon a mission best fulfilled 
When and wherever, in this changeful world, 
Power hath been given to please for higher ends 
Than pleasure only ; gladdening to prepare 
For wholesome sadness, troubling to refine, 
Calming to raise ; and, by a sapient Art 
Diffused through all the mysteries of our Being, 
Softening the toils and pains that have not ceased 
To cast their shadows on our mother Earth 
Since the primeval doom. Such is the grace 
Which, though unsued for, fails not to descend 
With heavenly inspiration ; such the aim 
That Reason dictates ; and, as even the wish 
Has virtue in it, why should hope to me 
Be wanting that sometimes, where fancied ills 
Harass the mind and strip from off the bowers 
Of private life then' natural pleasantness, 
A Voice — devoted to the love whose seeds 
Are sown in every human breast, to beauty 
Lodged within compass of the humblest sight, 
To cheerful intercourse with wood and field, 
And sympathy with man's substantial griefs — 
Will not be heard in vain ? And in those days 
When unforeseen distress spreads far and wide 
Among a People mournfully cast down, 
Or into anger roused by venal words 
In recklessness flung out to overturn 
The judgment, and divert the general heart 
From mutual good — some strain of thine, my Book ! 
Caught at propitious intervals, may win 
Listeners who not unwillingly admit 
Kindly emotion tending to console 
And reconcile ; and both with young and old 
Exalt the sense of thoughtful gratitude 
For benefits that still survive, by faith 
In progress, under laws divine, maintained. 
BYDAL MOUNT, 
March , . 

XIV. 
TO A CHILD. 

WRITTEN IN HER ALBUM. 
Small service is true service while it lasts : 
Of humblest Friends, bright Creature ! scorn not 
one: 
The Daisy, by the shadow that it casts, 
Protects the lingering dew-drop from the Sun. 
. 

xv. 
LINES 
WRITTEN IN THE ALBUM OP THE COUNTESS OF LONDALI 
NOV. , . 
Lady ! a Pen (perhaps with thy regard, 
Among the Favoured, favoured not the least) 
Left, 'mid the Records of this Book inscribed, 
Deliberate traces, registers of thought 
And feeling, suited to the place and time 
That gave them birth : — months passed, and sti 
this hand, 
That had not been too timid to imprint 
Words which the virtues of thy Lord inspired, 
Was yet not bold enough to write of Thee. 
And why that scrupulous reserve  In sooth 
The blameless cause lay in the Theme itself. 
Flowers are there many that delight to strive 
With the sharp wind, and seem to court the showc 
Yet are by nature careless of the sun 
Whether he shine on them or not ; and some, 
Where'er he moves along the unclouded sky, 
Turn a broad front full on his flattering beams 
Others do rather from their notice shrink, 
Loving the dewy shade, — a humble band, 
Modest and sweet, a progeny of earth, 
Congenial with thy mind and character, 
High-born Augusta ! 
Witness Towers, and Grove 
And Thou, wild Stream, that giv'st the honour 
name 
Of Lowther to this ancient Line, bear witness 
From thy most secret haunts ; and ye Parterre; 
Which She is pleased and proud to call her own 
•Witness how oft upon my noble Friend 
Mute offerings, tribute from an inward sense 
Of admiration and respectful love, 
Have waited — till the affections could no more 
Endure that silence, and broke out in song, 
Snatches of music taken up and dropt 
Like those self-solacing, those under, notes 
Trilled by the redbreast, when autumnal leaves | 
Are thin upon the bough. Mine, only mine, 
The pleasure was, and no one heard the praise, 
Checked, in the moment of its issue, checked 
And reprehended, by a fancied blush 
From the pure qualities that called it forth. 
Thus Virtue lives debarred from Virtue's B>« 
Thus, Lady, is retiredness a veil 
That, while it only spreads a softening charm 
O'er features looked at by discerning eyes, 
Hides half their beauty from the common gaze ; 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

id thus, even on the exposed and breezy hill 
i lofty station, female goodness walks, 
hen side by side with lunar gentleness, 
j in a cloister. Yet the grateful Poor 
uch the immunities of low estate, 
lin Nature's enviable privilege, 
; r sacred recompence for many wants) 
Ben their hearts before Thee, pouring out 
 that they think and feel, with tears of joy ; 
„d benedictions not unheard in heaven : 
■d friend in the ear of friend, where speech is free 
I follow truth, is eloquent as they. 

?hen let the Book receive in these prompt lines 
Bust memorial; and thine eyes consent 
'read that they, who mark thy course, behold 
i:ife declining with the golden light 
(Rummer, in the season of sere leaves ; 
I cheerfulness undamped by stealing Time ; 
■ studied kindness flow with easy stream, 
i istrated with inborn courtesy ; 
Al an habitual disregard of self 
EJinced by vigilance for others' weal. 
I 
ijad shall the Verse not tell of lighter gifts 
h these ennobling attributes conjoined 
A,l blended, in peculiar harmony, 
BlYouth's surviving spirit ? What agile grace ! 
A ymph-like liberty, in nymph-like form, 
Ejeld with wonder ; whether floor or path 
T;u tread ; or sweep — borne on the managed 
; steed — 
I <:t as the shadows, over down or field, 
li'ven by strong winds at play among the clouds. 
 
et one word more — one farewell word — a wish 
V ich came, but it has passed into a prayer — 
Tit, as thy sun in brightness is declining, 
ft -at an hour yet distant for their sakes 
Wise tender love, here faltering on the way 
; diviner love, will be foi'given — 
W iay it set in peace, to rise again 
F I everlasting glory won by faith. 

XVI. 
GRACE DARLING. 

A ng the dwellers in the silent fields 
Tl| natural heart is touched, and public way 
A i crowded street resound with ballad strains, 
Injired by one whose very name bespeaks 
W>ur divine, exalting human love ; 

Whom, since her birth on bleak Northumbrian 
coast, 
Known unto few but prized as far as known, 
A single Act endears to high and low 
Through the whole land — to Manhood, moved in 
spite 
Of the world's freezing cares — to generous Youth — 
To Infancy, that lisps her praise — to Age 
Whose eye reflects it, glistening through a tear 
Of tremulous admiration. Such true fame 
Awaits her now ; but, verily, good deeds 
Do no imperishable record find 
Save in the rolls of heaven, where hers may live 
A theme for angels, when they celebrate 
The high-souled virtues which forgetful earth 
Has witness'd. Oh ! that winds and waves could 
speak 
Of things which their united power called forth 
From the pure depths of her humanity ! 
A Maiden gentle, yet, at duty's call, 
Firm and unflinching, as the Lighthouse reared 
On the Island-rock, her lonely dwelling-place ; 
Or like the invincible Rock itself that braves, 
Age after age, the hostile elements, 
As when it guarded holy Cuthbert's cell. 
All night the storm had raged, nor ceased, nor 
paused, 
When, as day broke, the Maid, through misty air, 
Espies far off a Wreck, amid the surf, 
Beating on one of those disastrous isles — 
Half of a Vessel, half — no more ; the rest 
Had vanished, swallowed up with all that there 
Had for the common safety striven in vain, 
Or thither thronged for refuge. With quick glance 
Daughter and Sire through optic-glass discern, 
Clinging about the remnant of this Ship, 
Creatures— how precious in the Maiden's sight ! 
For whom, belike, the old Man grieves still more 
Than for their fellow-sufferers engulfed 
Where every parting agony is hushed, 
And hope and fear mix not in further strife. 
" But courage, Father ! let us out to sea, — 
A few may yet be saved." The Daughter's words, 
Her earnest tone, and look beaming with faith, 
Dispel the Father's doubts : nor do they lack 
The noble-minded Mother's helping hand 
To launch the boat ; and with her blessing cheered, 
And inwardly sustained by silent prayer, 
Together they put forth, Father and Child ! 
Each grasps an oar, and struggling on they go — 
Rivals in effort ; and, alike intent 
Here to elude and there surmount, they watch 
The billows lengthening, mutually crossed 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

And shattered, and re-gathering their might ; 
As if the tumult, by the Almighty's will 
Were, in the conscious sea, roused and prolonged 
That woman's fortitude — so tried, so proved — 
May brighten more and more ! 
True to the mark, 
They stem the current of that perilous gorge, 
Their arms still strengthening with the strength- 
ening heart, 
Though danger, as the Wreck is near'd, becomes 
More imminent. Not unseen do they approach ; 
And rapture, with varieties of fear 
Incessantly conflicting, thrills the frames 
Of those who, in that dauntless energy, 
Foretaste deliverance ; but the least perturbed 
Can scarcely trust his eyes, when he perceives 
That of the pair — tossed on the waves to bring 
Hope to the hopeless, to the dying, life — ■ 
One is a Woman, a poor earthly sister, 
Or, be the Visitant other than she seems, 
A guardian Spirit sent from pitying Heaven, 
In woman's shape. But why prolong the tale, 
Casting weak words amid a host of thoughts 
Armed to repel them ? Every hazard faced 
And difficulty mastered, with resolve 
That no one breathing should be left to perish, 
This last remainder of the crew are all 
Placed in the little boat, then o'er the deep 
Are safely borne, landed upon the beach, 
And, in fulfilment of God's mercy, lodged 
Within the sheltering Lighthouse. — Shout, ye 
Waves ! 
Send forth a song of triumph. Waves and Winds, 
Exult in this deliverance wrought through faith 
In Him whose Providence your rage hath served! 
Ye screaming Sea-mews, in the concert join ! 
And would that some immortal Voice — a Voice 
Fitly attuned to all that gratitude 
Breathes out from floor or couch, through pallid 
lips 
Of the survivors — to the clouds might bear — 
Blended with praise of that parental love, 
Beneath whose watchful eye the Maiden grew 
Pious and pure, modest and yet so brave, 
Though young so wise, though meek so resolute — 
Might carry to the clouds and to the stars, 
Yea, to celestial Choirs, Grace Darling's name ! 
. 

XVII. 
THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 

PART I. 

Enough of rose-bud lips, and eyes 
Like harebells bathed in dew, 
Of cheek that with carnation vies, 
And veins of violet hue; 
Earth wants not beauty that may scorn 
A likening to frail flowers ; 
Yea, to the stars, if they were bom 
For seasons and for hours. 
Through Moscow's gates, with gold unhanred, 
Stepped One at dead of night, 
Whom such high beauty could not guard 
From meditated blight ; 
By stealth she passed, and fled as fast 
As doth the hvuited fawn, 
Nor stopped, till in the dappling east 
Appeared unwelcome dawn. 
Seven days she lurked in brake and field, 
Seven nights her course renewed, 
Sustained by what her scrip might yield, 
Or berries of the wood ; 
At length, in darkness travelling on, 
When lowly doors were shut, 
The haven of her hope she won, 
Her Foster-mother's hut. 
" To put your love to dangerous proof 
I come," said she, " from far; 
For I have left my Father's roof, 
In terror of the Czar." 
No answer did the Matron give, 
No second look she cast, 
But hung upon the Fugitive, 
Embracing and embraced. 
She led the Lady to a seat 
Beside the glimmering fire, 
Bathed duteously her wayworn feet, 
Prevented each desire : — 
The cricket chirped, the house-dog dozed, 
And on that simple bed, 
Where she in childhood had reposed, 
Now rests her weary head. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 


: When she, whose couch had been the sod, 
Whose curtain, pine or thorn, 
Had breathed a sigh of thanks to God, 
Who comforts the forlorn ; 
While over her the Matron bent 
Sleep sealed her eyes, and stole 
Feeling from limbs with travel spent, 
And trouble from the soul. 
Refreshed, the Wanderer rose at morn, 
And soon again was dight 
In those unworthy vestments worn 
Through long and perilous flight ; 
And " beloved Nurse," she said, 
" My thanks with silent tears 
Have unto Heaven and You been paid : 
Now listen to my fears ! 
"Have you forgot" — and here she smiled— 
" The babbling flatteries 
'You lavished on me when a child 
I Disporting round your knees % 
I was your lambkin, and your bird, 
' Your star, your gem, your flower ; 
Light words, that were more lightly heard 
In many a cloudless hour ! 
 The blossom you so fondly praised 
Is come to bitter fruit ; 
LA. mighty One upon me gazed ; 
I spurned his lawless suit, 
■And must be hidden from his wrath : 
' You, Foster-father dear, 
Will guide me in my forward path ; 
I may not tarry here ! 
' I cannot bring to utter woe 
Your proved fidelity." — 
' Dear Child, sweet Mistress, say not so ! 
For you we both would die." 
' Nay, nay, I come with semblance feigned 
And cheek embrowned by art ; 
f et, being inwardly unstained, 
With courage will depart." 
' But whither would you, could you, flee ? 
A poor Man's counsel take ; 
The Holy Virgin gives to me 
A thought for your dear sake ; 
est, shielded by our Lady's grace, 
And soon shall you be led 
j Forth to a safe abiding-place, 
Where never foot doth tread." 

PART II. 
The dwelling of this faithful pan- 
In a straggling village stood, 
For One who breathed unquiet air 
A dangerous neighbourhood ; 
But wide around lay forest ground 
With thickets rough and blind ; 
And pine-trees made a heavy shade 
Impervious to the wind. 
And there, sequestered from the sight, 
Was spread a treacherous swamp, 
On which the noonday sun shed light 
As from a lonely lamp ; 
And midway in the unsafe morass, 
A single Island rose 
Of firm dry ground, with healthful grass 
Adorned, and shady boughs. 
The Woodman knew, for such the craft 
This Russian vassal plied, 
That never fowler's gun, nor shaft 
Of archer, there was tried ; 
A sanctuary seemed the spot 
From all intrusion free ; 
And there he planned an artful Cot 
For perfect secrecy. 
With earnest pains unchecked by dread 
Of Power's far-stretching hand, 
The bold good Man his labour sped 
At nature's pure command ; 
Heart-soothed, and busy as a wren, 
While, in a hollow nook, 
She moulds her sight-eluding den 
Above a murmuring brook. 
His task accomplished to his mind, 
The twain ere break of day 
Creep forth, and through the forest wind 
Their solitary way ; 
Few words they speak, nor dare to slack 
Their pace from mile to mile, 
Till they have crossed the quaking marsh, 
And reached the lonely Isle. 
The sun above the pine-trees showed 
A bright and cheerful face ; 
And Ina looked for her abode, 
The promised hiding-place ; 
She sought in vain, the Woodman smiled ; 
No threshold could be seen, 
Nor roof, nor window ; — all seemed wild 
As it had ever been. 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

Advancing, you might guess an hour, 
The front with such nice care 
Is masked, 'if house it he or bower,' 
But in they entered are ; 
As shaggy as were wall and root 
With branches intertwined, 
So smooth was all within, air-proof, 
And delicately lined : 
And hearth was there, and maple dish, 
And cups in seemly rows, 
And couch — all ready to a wish 
For nurture or repose ; 
And Heaven doth to her virtue grant 
That here she may abide 
In solitude, with every want 
By cautious love supplied. 
No queen, before a shouting crowd, 
Led on in bridal state, 
E'er struggled with a heart so proud, 
Entering her palace gate ; 
Rejoiced to bid the world farewell, 
No saintly anchoress 
E'er took possession of her cell 
With deeper thankfulness. 
"Father of all, upon thy care 
And mercy am I thrown ; 
Be thou my safeguard ! " — such her prayer 
When she was left alone, 
Kneeling amid the wilderness 
When joy had passed away, 
And smiles, fond efforts of distress 
To hide what they betray ! 
The prayer is heard, the Saints have seen, 
Diffused through form and face, 
Resolves devotedly serene ; 
That monumental grace 
Of Faith, which doth all passions tame 
That Reason should control ; 
And shows in the untrembling frame 
A statue of the soul. 

'Tis sung in ancient minstrelsy 
That Phoebus wont to wear 
The leaves of any pleasant tree 
Around his golden hair; 

Till Daphne, desperate with pursuit 
Of his imperious love, 
At her own prayer transformed, took root, 
A laurel in the grove. 
Then did the Penitent adorn 
His brow with laurel green ; 
And 'mid his bright locks never shorn 
No meaner leaf was seen ; 
And poets sage, through every age, 
About their temples wound 
The bay ; and conquerors thanked the Gods, 
With laurel chaplets crowned. 
Into the mists of fabling Time 
So far runs back the praise 
Of Beauty, that disdains to climb 
Along forbidden ways ; 
That scorns temptation ; power defies 
Where mutual love is not ; 
And to the tomb for rescue flies 
When life would be a blot. 
To this fair Votaress, a fate 
More mild doth Heaven ordain 
Upon her Island desolate ; 
And words, not breathed in vain, 
Might tell what intercourse she found, 
Her silence to endear ; 
What birds she tamed, what flowers the groan 
Sent forth her peace to cheer. 
To one mute Presence, above all, 
Her soothed affections clung, 
A picture on the cabin wall 
By Russian usage hung — 
The Mother-maid, whose countenance bright 
With love abridged the day ; 
And, communed with by taper light, 
Chased spectral fears away. 
And oft, as either Guardian came, 
The joy in that retreat 
Might any common friendship shame, 
So high then." hearts would beat ; 
And to the lone Recluse, whate'er 
They brought, each visiting 
Was like the crowding of the year 
With a new burst of spring. 
But, when she of her Parents thought, 
The pang was hard to bear ; 
And, if with all things not enwrought, 
That trouble still is near. 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

 

Before her flight she had not dared 
Their constancy to prove, 
i Too much the heroic Daughter feared 
The weakness of their love. 
Dark is the past to them, and dark 
The future still must be, 
Till pitying Saints conduct her bark 
Into a safer sea — 
Or gentle Nature close her eyes, 
And set her Spirit free 
: From the altar of this sacrifice, 
iln vestal purity. 
Yet, when above the forest-glooms 
The white swans southward passed, 
High as the pitch of their swift plumes 
Her fancy rode the blast ; 
And bore her toward the fields of France 
Her Father's native land, 
i To mingle in the rustic dance, 
The happiest of the band ! 
Of those beloved fields she oft 
Had heard her Father tell 
In phrase that now with echoes soft 
Haunted her lonely cell ; 
She saw the hereditary bowers, 
She heard the ancestral stream ; 
The Kremlin and its haughty towers 
Forgotten like a dream ! 

The ever-changing Moon had traced 
Twelve times her monthly round, 
When through the unfrequented Waste 
Was heard a startling sound ; 
A shout thrice sent from one who chased 
At speed a wounded deer, 
Bounding through branches interlaced, 
And where the wood was clear. 
The fainting creature took the marsh, 
And toward the Island fled, 
While plovers screamed with tumult harsh 
Above his antlered head ; 
This, Ina saw ; and, pale with fear, 
Shrunk to her citadel ; 
The desperate deer rushed on, and near 
The tangled covert fell. 

Across the marsh, the game in view, 
The Hunter followed fast, 
Nor paused, till o'er the stag he blew 
A death-proclaiming blast ; 
Then, resting on her upright mind, 
Came forth the Maid — " In me 
Behold," she said, " a stricken Hind 
Pursued by destiny ! 
" From your deportment, Sir ! I deem 
That you have worn a sword, 
And will not hold in light esteem 
A suffering woman's word ; 
There is my covert, there perchance 
I might have lain concealed, 
My fortunes hid, my countenance 
Not even to you revealed. 
" Tears might be shed, and I might pray, 
Crouching and terrified, 
That what has been unveiled to day, 
You would in mystery hide ; 
But I will not defile with dust 
The knee that bends to adore 
The God in heaven; — attend, be just; 
This ask I, and no more ! 
" I speak not of the winter's cold, 
For summer's heat exchanged, 
While I have lodged in this rough hold, 
From social life estranged ; 
Nor yet of trouble and alarms : 
High Heaven is my defence ; 
And every season has soft arms 
For injured Innocence. 
" From Moscow to the Wilderness 
It was my choice to come, 
Lest virtue should be harbourless, 
And honour want a home ; 
And happy were I, if the Czar 
Retain his lawless will, 
To end life here like this poor deer, 
Or a lamb on a green hill." 
" Are you the Maid," the Stranger cried, 
" From Gallic parents sprung, 
Whose vanishing was rumoured wide, 
Sad theme for every tongue ; 
Who foiled an Emperor's eager quest ? 
You, Lady, forced to wear 
These rude habiliments, and rest 
Your head in this dark lair ! " 

 

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 

But wonder, pity, soon were quelled ; 
And in her face and mien 
The soul's pure brightness he beheld 
Without a veil between : 
He loved, he hoped, — a holy flame 
Kindled 'mid rapturous tears ; 
The passion of a moment came 
As on the wings of years. 
" Such bounty is no gift of chance," 
Exclaimed he ; " righteous Heaven, 
Preparing your deliverance, 
To me the charge hath given. 
The Czar full oft in words and deeds 
Is stormy and self-willed ; 
But, when the Lady Catherine pleads, 
His violence is stilled. 
" Leave open to my wish the course, 
And I to her will go ; 
From that humane and heavenly source, 
Good, only good, can flow." 
Faint sanction given, the Cavalier 
Was eager to depart, 
Though question followed question, dear 
To the Maiden's filial heart. 
Light was his step, — his hopes, more light, 
Kept pace with his desires ; 
And the fifth morning gave him sight 
Of Moscow's glittering spires. 

He sued : — heart-smitten by the wrong, 
To the lorn Fugitive 
The Emperor sent a pledge as strong 
As sovereign power could give. 
more than mighty change ! If e'er 
Amazement rose to pain, 
And joy's excess produced a fear 
Of something void and vain ; 
'Twas when the Parents, who had mourned 
So long the lost as dead, 
Beheld their only Child returned, 
The household floor to tread. 
Soon gratitude gave way to love 
Within the Maiden's breast : 
Delivered and Deliverer move 
In bridal garments drest; 
Meek Catherine had her own reward ; 
The Czar bestowed a dower ; 
And universal Moscow shared 
The triumph of that hour. 
Flowers strewed the ground ; the nuptial feast 
Was held with costly state ; 
And there, 'mid many a noble guest, 
The Foster-parents sate ; 
Encouraged by the imperial eye, 
They shrank not into shade ; 
Great was their bliss, the honour high 
To them and nature paid ! 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

THE GROUNDS OF COLEORTON, THE SEAT OF SIR 
GEORGE BEAUMONT, BART., LEICESTERSHIRE. 
. 
IE embowering rose, the acacia, and the pine, 
ill not unwillingly their place resign ; 
but the Cedar thrive that near them stands, 
anted by Beaumont's and by Wordsworth's hands. 
le wooed the silent Art with studious pains : 
lese groves have heard the Other's pensive strains ; 
'svoted thus, their spirits did unite 
If interchange of knowledge and delight. 
lay Nature's kindliest powers sustain the Tree, 
ad Love protect it from all injury ! 
ad when its potent branches, wide out-thrown, 
arken the brow of this memorial Stone, 
ere may some Painter sit in future days, 
>me future Poet meditate his lays ; 
ot mindless of that distant age renowned 
:Tien Inspiration hovered o'er this ground, 
le haunt of him who sang how spear and shield 
 civil conflict met on Bosworth-field ; 
:ad of that famous Youth, full soon removed 
"om earth, perhaps by Shakspeare's self approved, 
'.etcher's Associate, Jonson's Friend beloved. 

IN A GARDEN OF THE SAME. 
ft is the medal faithful to its trust 
'hen temples, columns, towers, are laid in dust ; 
nd 'tis a common ordinance of fate 
liat things obscure and small outlive the great : 
ence, when yon mansion and the flowery trim 
f this fair garden, and its aUeys dim, 
nd ail its stately trees, are passed away, 
bis little Niche, unconscious of decay, 
jerchance may still survive. And be it known 
ihat it was scooped within the living stone, — 
i ot by the sluggish and ungrateful pains 
f labourer plodding for his daily gains, 

But by an industry that wrought in love ; 
With help from female hands, that proudly strove 
To aid the work, what time these walks and bowers 
Were shaped to cheer dark winter's lonely hours. 

in. 
WRITTEN AT THE REQUEST OF SIR GEORGE BEAU- 
MONT, BART., AND IN HIS NAME, FOR AN URN, 
PLACED BY HIM AT THE TERMINATION OF A NEWLY- 
PLANTED AVENUE, IN THE SAME GROUNDS. 
Ye Lime-trees, ranged before this hallowed Urn, 
Shoot forth with lively power at Spring's return ; 
And be not slow a stately growth to rear 
Of pillars, branching off from year to year, 
Till they have learned to frame a darksome aisle ; — 
That may recal to mind that awful Pile 
Where Reynolds, 'mid our country's noblest dead, 
In the last sanctity of fame is laid. 
■ — There, though by right the excelling Painter sleep 
Where Death and Glory a joint sabbath keep, 
Yet not the less his Spirit would hold dear 
Self-hidden praise, and Friendship's private tear : 
Hence, on my patrimonial grounds, have I 
Raised this frail tribute to his memory ; 
From youth a zealous follower of the Art 
That he professed ; attached to him in heart ; 
Admiring, loving, and with grief and pride 
Feeling what England lost when Reynolds died. 

FOR A SEAT IN THE GROVES OF COLEORTON. 
Beneath yon eastern ridge, the craggy bound, 
Rugged and high, of Charnwood's forest ground 
Stand yet, but, Stranger ! hidden from thy view, 
The ivied Ruins of forlorn Grace Dieu ; 
Erst a religious House, which day and night 
With hymns resounded, and the chanted rite : 
And when those rites had ceased, the Spot gave 
birth 
To honourable Men of various worth : 

 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

There, on the margin of. a streamlet wild, 
Did Francis Beaumont sport, an eager child ; 
There, under shadow of the neighbouring rocks, 
Sang youthful tales of shepherds and their flocks ; 
Unconscious prelude to heroic themes, 
Heart-breaking tears, and melancholy dreams 
Of slighted love, and scorn, and jealous rage, 
With which his genius shook the buskined stage. 
Communities are lost, and Empires die, 
And things of holy use unhallowed he ; 
They perish ; — but the Intellect can raise, 
From airy words alone, a Pile that ne'er decays. 
. 

WRITTEN WITH A PENCIL UPON A STONE IN THE 
WALL OF THE HOUSE (AN OUT-HOUSE), ON THE 
ISLAND AT GRASMERE. 
Rude is this Edifice, and Thou hast seen 
Buildings, albeit rude, that have maintained 
Proportions more harmonious, and approached 
To closer fellowship with ideal grace. 
But take it in good part : — alas ! the poor 
Vitruvius of our village had no help 
From the great City ; never, upon leaves 
Of red Morocco foho saw displayed, 
In long succession, pre-existing ghosts 
Of Beauties yet unborn — the rustic Lodge 
Antique, and Cottage with verandah graced, 
Nor lacking, for fit company, alcove, 
Green-house, shell-grot, and moss-lined hermitage. 
Thou see'st a homely Pile, yet to these walls 
The heifer comes in the snow-storm, and here 
The new-dropped lamb finds shelter from the wind. 
And hither does one Poet sometimes row 
His pinnace, a small vagrant barge, up-piled 
With plenteous store of heath and withered fern, 
(A lading which he with his sickle cuts, 
Among the mountains) and beneath this roof 
He makes his summer couch, and here at noon 
Spreads out his limbs, while, yet unshorn, the 
Sheep, 
Panting beneath the burthen of their wool, 
Lie round him, even as if they were a part 
Of his own Household : nor, while from his bed 
He looks, through the open door-place, toward the 
lake 
And to the stirring breezes, does he want 
Creations lovely as the work of sleep — 
Fair sights, and visions of romantic joy ! 

WRITTEN WITH A SLATE PENCIL ON A STONE, ON TH 
SIDE OF THE MOUNTAIN OF BLACK COMB. 
Stay, bold Adventurer ; rest awhile thy limbs 
On this commodious Seat ! for much remains 
Of hard ascent before thou reach the top 
Of this huge Eminence, — from blackness named 
And, to far-travelled storms of sea and land, 
A favourite spot of tournament and war ! 
But thee may no such boisterous visitants 
Molest ; may gentle breezes fan thy brow ; 
And neither cloud conceal, nor misty air 
Bedim, the grand terraqueous spectacle, 
From centre to circumference, unveiled ! 
Know, if thou grudge not to prolong thy rest, 
That on the summit whither thou art bound, 
A geographic Labourer pitched his tent, 
With books supplied and instruments of art, 
To measure height and distance ; lonely task, 
Week after week pursued ! — To him was given 
Full many a glimpse (but sparingly bestowed 
On timid man) of Nature's processes 
Upon the exalted hills. He made report 
That once, while there he plied his studious work 
Within that canvass Dwelling, colours, lines, 
And the whole surface of the out-spread map, 
Became invisible : for all around 
Had darkness fallen— unthreatened,unproclaiiued- 
As if the golden day itself had been 
Extinguished in a moment ; total gloom, 
In which he sate alone, with unclosed eyes, 
Upon the blinded mountain's silent top ! 
MX 

VII. 
WRITTEN WITH A SLATE PENCIL UPON A STONF, THI 
LARGEST OF A HEAP LYING NEAR A DESEBTEI 
QUARRY, UPON ONE OF THE ISLANDS AT RYDAL. 
Stranger ! this hillock of mis-shapen stones 
Is not a Ruin spared or made by time, 
Nor, as perchance thou rashly deem'st, the Cairo 
Of some old British Chief : 'tis nothing more 
Than the rude embryo of a little Dome 
Or Pleasure-house, once destined to be built 
Among the birch-trees of this rocky isle. 
But, as it chanced, Sir William having learned 
That from the shore a full-grown man might m 
And make himself a freeman of this spot 
At any hour he chose, the prudent Knight 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

 

jsisted, and the quarry and the mound 
|e monuments of his unfinished task. 
e block on which these lines are traced, perhaps, 
is once selected as the corner-stone 
(that intended Pile, which would have been 
§ae quaint odd plaything of elaborate skill, 
,' that, I guess, the linnet and the thrush, 
d other little builders who dwell here, 
Id wondered at the work. But blame him not, 
• old Sir William was a gentle Knight, 
] Ld in this vale, to which he appertained 
i: th all his ancestry. Then peace to him, 
j d for the outrage which he had devised 
■tire forgiveness ! — But if thou art one 
 fire with thy impatience to become 
I inmate of these mountains, — if, disturbed 
] beautiful conceptions, thou hast hewn 
of the quiet rock the elements 
(thy trim Mansion destined soon to blaze 
 snow-white splendour, — think again; and, taught 
I old Sir William and his quarry, leave 
m fragments to the bramble and the rose ; 
l:re let the vernal slow-worm sun himself, 
/I let the redbreast hop from stone to stone. 
. 

n these fair vales hath many a Tree 
At Wordsworth's suit been spared ; 
ind from the builder's hand this Stone, 
^or some rude beauty of its own, 
Was rescued by the Bard : 
io let it rest ; and time will come 
When here the tender-hearted 
lay heave a gentle sigh for him, 
As one of the departed. 

He massy Ways, carried across these heights 
 Roman perseverance, are destroyed, 
(hidden under ground, like sleeping worms. 
|> venture then to hope that Time will spare 
Is humble Walk ? Yet on the mountain's side 
'jPoet's hand first shaped it ; and the steps 
Uhat same Bard — repeated to and fro 
^jmorn, at noon, and under moonlight skies 
"I'ough the vicissitudes of many a year — 
I bade the weeds to creep o'er its grey line. 
^ longer, scattering to the heedless winds 

The vocal raptures of fresh poesy, 
Shall he frequent these precincts ; locked no more 
In earnest converse with beloved Friends, 
Here will he gather stores of ready bliss, 
As from the beds and borders of a garden 
Choice flowers are gathered ! But, if Power may 
spring 
Out of a farewell yearning — favoured more 
Than kindred wishes mated suitably 
With vain regrets — the Exile would consign 
This Walk, his loved possession, to the care 
Of those pure Minds that reverence the Muse. 
. 

INSCRIPTIONS SUPPOSED TO BE FOUND IN AND NEAR 
A hermit's CELL. 

Hopes what are they ? — Beads of morning 
Strung on slender blades of grass ; 
Or a spider's web adorning 
In a strait and treacherous pass. 
What are fears but voices airy ? 
Whispering harm where harm is not ; 
And deluding the unwary 
Till the fatal bolt is shot ! 
What is glory ? — in the socket 
See how dying tapers fare ! 
What is pride ? — a whizzing rocket 
That would emulate a star. 
What is friendship  — do not trust her, 
N or the vows which she has made ; 
Diamonds dart their brightest lustre 
From a palsy-shaken head. 
What is truth ? — a staff rejected ; 
Duty ? — an unwelcome clog ; 
Joy ? — a moon by fits reflected 
In a swamp or watery bog ; 
Bright, as if through ether steering, 
To the Traveller's eye it shone : 
He hath hailed it re-appearing — 
And as quickly it is gone ; 
Such is Joy — as quickly hidden, 
Or mis-shapen to the sight, 
And by sullen weeds forbidden 
To resume its native light. 

 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

What is youth ? — a dancing billow, 
(Winds behind, and rocks before !) 
Age ? — a drooping, tottering willow 
On a flat and lazy shore. 
What is peace ? — when pain is over, 
And love ceases to rebel, 
Let the last faint sigh discover 
That precedes the passing-knell ! 

XI. 
INSCRIBED UPON A ROCK. 
II. 
Pause, Traveller ! whosoe'er thou be 
Whom chance may lead to this retreat, 
Where silence yields reluctantly 
Even to the fleecy straggler's bleat ; 
Give voice to what my hand shall trace, 
And fear not lest an idle sound 
Of words unsuited to the place 
Disturb its solitude profound. 
I saw this Rock, while vernal air 
Blew softly o'er the russet heath, 
Uphold a Monument as fair 
As church or abbey furnisheth. 
Unsullied did it meet the day, 
Like marble, white, like ether, pure ; 
As if, beneath, some hero lay, 
Honoured with costliest sepulture. 
My fancy kindled as I gazed ; 
And, ever as the sun shone forth, 
The flattered structure glistened, blazed, 
And seemed the proudest thing on earth. 
But frost had reared the gorgeous Pile 
Unsound as those which Fortune builds— 
To undermine with secret guile, 
Sapped by the very beam that gilds. 
And, while I gazed, with sudden shock 
Fell the whole Fabric to the ground ; 
And naked left this dripping Rock, 
With shapeless ruin spread around ! 

Hast thou seen, with flash incessant, 
Bubbles gliding under ice, 
Bodied forth and evanescent, 
No one knows by what device ? 
Such are thoughts ! — A wind-swept meadow 
Mimicking a troubled sea, 
Such is life ; and death a shadow 
From the rock eternity ! 

XIII. 
NEAR THE SPRING OF THE HERMITAGE. 
IV. 
Troubled long with warring notions 
Long impatient of thy rod, 
I resign my soul's emotions 
Unto Thee, mysterious God ! 
What avails the kindly shelter 
Yielded by this craggy rent, 
If my spirit toss and welter 
On the waves of discontent ? 
Parching Summer hath no warrant 
To consume this crystal Well ; 
Rains, that make each rill a torrent, 
Neither sully it nor swell. 
Thus, dishonouring not her station, 
Would my Life present to Thee, 
Gracious God, the pure oblation 
Of divine tranquillity ! 

Not seldom, clad in radiant vest, 
Deceitfully goes forth the Morn ; 
Not seldom Evening in the west 
Sinks smilingly forsworn. 
The smoothest seas will sometimes prove, 
To the confiding Bark, untrue ; 
And, if she trust the stars above, 
They can be treacherous too. 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

 

The umbrageous Oak, in pomp outspread, 
Full oft, when storms the welkin rend, 
braws lightning down upon the head 
[t promised to defend. 

lut Thou art true, incarnate Lord, 
.Who didst vouchsafe for man to die ; 
Thy smile is sure, thy plighted word 
No change can falsify ! 
;[ bent before thy gracious throne, 
A.nd asked for peace on suppliant knee ; 
\nd peace was given, — nor peace alone, 
But faith sublimed to ecstasy ! 

r the spot where the hermitage stood on 
■ st. Herbert's island, derwent-water. 
Ithou in the dear love of some one Friend 
I st been so happy thatthou know'st what thoughts 
\[l sometimes in the happiness of love 
Jike the heart sink, then wilt thou reverence 
lis quiet spot ; and, Stranger ! not unmoved 
Ylt thou behold this shapeless heap of stones, 
Ts desolate ruins of St. Herbert's Cell. 
I ?e stood his threshold ; here was spread the roof 
%t sheltered him, a self-secluded Man, 
I'ev long exercise in social cares 
I I offices humane, intent to adore 

The Deity, with undistracted mind, 
And meditate on everlasting things, 
In utter solitude.- — But he had left 
A Fellow-labourer, whom the good Man loved 
As his own soul. And, when with eye upraised 
To heaven he knelt before the crucifix, 
While o'er the lake the cataract of Lodore 
Pealed to his orisons, and when he paced 
Along the beach of this small isle and thought 
Of his Companion, he would pray that both 
(Now that their earthly duties were fulfilled) 
Might die in the same moment. Nor in vain 
So prayed he : — as our chronicles report, 
Though here the Hermit numbered his last day 
Far from St. Cuthbert his beloved Friend, 
Those holy Men both died in the same hour. 
. 

on the banks of a rocky stream. 
Behold an emblem of our human mind 
Crowded with thoughts that need a settled home, 
Yet, like to eddying balls of foam 
Within this whirlpool, they each other chase 
Round and round, and neither find 
An outlet nor a resting-place ! 
Stranger, if such disquietude be thine, 
Fall on thy knees and sue for help divine. 



 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER. 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER 
MODERNISED. 

THE PRIORESS' TALE. 
 Call up him who left half told 
The story of Cambusean bold.' 

In the following Poem no further deviation from the 
original has been made than was necessary for the fluent 
reading and instant understanding of the Author : so much, 
however, is the language altered since Chaucer's time, 
especially in pronunciation, that much was to be removed, 
and its place supplied with as little incongruity as possible. 
The ancient accent has been retained in a few con j unc- 
tions, as alsd and alway, from a conviction that such 
sprinklings of antiquity would be admitted, by persons of 
taste, to have a graceful accordance with the subject. 
The fierce bigotry of the Prioress forms a fine back-ground 
for her tender-hearted sympathies with the Mother and 
Child ; and the mode in which the story is told amply 
atones for the extravagance of the miracle. 

" Lord, our Lord ! how wondrously," (quoth she) 
a Thy name in this large world is spread abroad ! 
For not alone by men of dignity 
Thy worship is performed and precious laud ; 
But by the mouths of children, gracious God ! 
Thy goodness is set forth ; they when they lie 
Upon the breast thy name do glorify. 

Wherefore in praise, the worthiest that I may, 
Jesu ! of thee, and the white Lily-flower 
Which did thee bear, and is a Maid for aye, 
To tell a story I will use my power ; 
Not that I may increase her honour's dower, 
For she herself is honour, and the root 
Of goodness, next her Son, our soul's best boot. 

O Mother Maid ! Maid and Mother free ! 
bush unburnt ! burning in Moses' sight ! 
That down didst ravish from the Deity, 
Through humbleness, the spirit that did alight 
Upon thy heart, whence, through that glory's might, 
Conceived was the Father's sapience, 
Help me to tell it in thy reverence ! 

Lady ! thy goodness, thy magnificence, 
Thy virtue, and thy great humility, 
Surpass all science and all utterance ; 
For sometimes, Lady ! ere men pray to thee 
Thou goest before in thy benignity, 
The light to us vouchsafing of thy prayer, 
To be our guide unto thy Son so dear. 

My knowledge is so weak, blissful Queen ! 
To tell abroad thy mighty worthiness, 
That I the weight of it may not sustain ; 
But as a child of twelvemonths old or less, 
That laboureth his language to express, 
Even so fare I ; and therefore, I thee pray, 
Guide thou my song which I of thee shall say. 

There was in Asia, in a mighty town, 
'Mong Christian folk, a street where Jews might t| 
Assigned to them and given them for their own 
By a great Lord, for gain and usury, 
Hateful to Christ and to his company ; 
And through this street who list might ride iu 
wend ; 
Free was it, and unbarred at either end. 

A little school of Christian people stood 
Down at the farther end, in which there were 
A nest of children come of Christian blood, 
That learned in that school from year to year 
Such sort of doctrine as men used there, 
That is to say, to sing and read also, 
As little children in their childhood do. 

Among these children was a Widow's son, 
A little scholar, scarcely seven years old, 
Who day by day unto this school hath gone, 
And eke, when he the image did behold 
Of Jesu's Mother, as he had been told, 
This Child was wont to kneel adown and say 
Ave Marie, as he goeth by the way. 

THE PRIORESS' TALE. 

 

his Widow thus her little Son hath taught 
iur blissful Lady, Jesu's Mother dear, 
p worship aye, and he forgat it not ; 
bv simple infant hath a ready ear. 
veet is the holiness of youth : and hence, 
dling to mind this matter when I may, 
iiint Nicholas in my presence standeth aye, 
)r he so young to Christ did reverence. 

lis little Child, while in the school he sate 
s Primer conning with an earnest cheer, 
le whilst the rest their anthem-book repeat 
le Alma Redemptoris did he hear ; 
id as he durst he drew him near and near, 
id hearkened to the words and to the note, 
 the first verse he learned it all by rote. 

:is Latin knew he nothing what it said, 
!r he too tender was of age to know ; 
t to his comrade he repaired, and prayed 
at ho the meaning of this song would show, 
d unto Mm declare why men sing so ; 
is oftentimes, that he might be at ease, 
' is child did him beseech on his bare knees. 

Ij Schoolfellow, who elder was than he, 
Iswered him thus : — ' This song, I have heard say, 
is fashioned for our blissful Lady free ; 
r to salute, and also her to pray 
be our help upon our dying day : 
here is more in this, I know it not ; 
! ig do I learn, — small grammar I have got.' 

ad is this song fashioned in reverence 
< ; Jesu's Mother? ' said this Innocent ; 
' ow, certes, I will use my diligence 
- con it all ere Christmas-tide be spent ; 
t hough I for my Primer shall be shent, 
id shall be beaten three times in an hour, 
 w Lady I will praise with all my power.' 
XIV. 
I Schoolfellow, whom he had so besought, 
-'they went homeward taught him privily 
I I then he sang it well and fearlessly, 
■ m word to word according to the note : 
" ce in a day it passed through his throat ; 
 neward and schoolward whensoe'er he went, 
C Jesu's Mother fixed was his intent. 

Through all the Jewry (this before said I) 
This little Child, as he came to and fro, 
Full merrily then would he sing and cry, 
Alma Redemptoris  high and low : 
The sweetness of Christ's Mother pierced so 
His heart, that her to praise, to her to pray, 
He cannot stop his singing by the way. 

The Serpent, Satan, our first foe, that hath 
His wasp's nest in Jew's heart, upswelled — ' woe, 
Hebrew people ! ' said he in his wrath, 
' Is it an honest thing ? Shall this be bo ? 
That such a Boy where'er he lists shall go 
In your despite, and sing his hymns and saws, 
Which is against the reverence of our laws ! ' 

From that day forward have the Jews conspired 
Out of the world this Innocent to chase ; 
And to this end a Homicide they hired, 
That in an alley had a privy place, 
And, as the Child 'gan to the school to pace, 
This cruel Jew him seized, and held him fast 
And cut his throat, and in a pit him cast. 

I say that him into a pit they threw, 
A loathsome pit, whence noisome scents exhale ; 
cursed folk ! away, ye Herods new ! 
What may your ill intentions you avail ? 
Murder will out ; certes it will not fail ; 
Know, that the honour of high God may spread, 
The blood cries out on your accursed deed. 

Martyr 'stablished in virginity ! 
Now may'st thou sing for aye before the throne, 
Following the Lamb celestial," quoth she, 
" Of which the great Evangelist, Saint John, 
In Patmos wrote, who saith of them that go 
Before the Lamb singing continually, 
That never fleshly woman they did know. 

Now this poor widow waiteth all that night 
After her little Child, and he came not ; 
For which, by earliest glimpse of morning light, 
With face all pale with dread and busy thought, 
She at the School and elsewhere him hath sought, 
Until thus far she learned, that he had been 
In the Jews' street, and there he last was seen. 

 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER. 

With Mother's pity in her breast enclosed 
She goeth, as she were half out of her mind, 
To every place wherein she hath supposed 
By likelihood her little Son to find ; 
And ever on Christ's Mother meek and kind 
She cried, till to the Jewry she was brought, 
And him among the accursed Jews she sought. 

She asketh, and she piteously doth pray 
To every Jew that dwelleth in that place 
To tell her if her child had passed that way ; 
They all said — Nay ; but Jesu of his grace 
Gave to her thought, that in a little space 
She for her Son in that same spot did cry 
Where he was cast into a pit hard by. 

O thou great God that dost perform thy laud 
By mouths of Innocents, lo ! here thy might ; 
This gem of chastity, this emerald, 
And eke of martyrdom this ruby bright, 
There, where with mangled throat he lay upright, 
The Alma Redemptoris 'gan to sing 
So loud, that with his voice the place did ring. 

The Christian folk that through the Jewry went 
Come to the spot in wonder at the thing ; 
And hastily they for the Provost sent ; 
Immediately he came, not tarrying, 
And praiseth Christ that is our heavenly King, 
And eke his Mother, honour of Mankind : 
Which done,he bade that they the Jews should bind. 

This Child with piteous lamentation then 
Was taken up, singing his song alway ; 
And with procession great and pomp of men 
To the next Abbey him they bare away ; 
His Mother swooning by the body lay : 
And scarcely could the people that were near 
Remove this second Rachel from the bier. 

Torment and shameful death to every one 
This Provost doth for those bad Jews prepare 
That of this murder wist, and that anon : 
Such wickedness his judgments cannot spare ; 
Who will do evil, evil shall he bear ; 
Them therefore with wild horses did he draw, 
And after that he hung them by the law. 

XXVII. 
Upon his bier this Innocent doth lie 
Before the altar while the Mass doth last : 
The Abbot with his convent's company 
Then sped themselves to bury him full fast ; 
And, when they holy water on him cast, 
Yet spake this Child when sprinkled was the water 
And sang, Alma Redemptoris Mater t 
XXVIII. 
This Abbot, for he was a holy man, 
As all Monks are, or surely ought to be, 
In supplication to the Child began 
Thus saying, ' dear Child ! I summon thee 
In virtue of the holy Trinity 
Tell me the cause why thou dost sing this hymn, 
Since that thy throat is cut, as it doth seem.' 

' My throat is cut unto the bone, I trow,' 
Said this young Child, 'and by the law of kind 
I should have died, yea many hours ago ; 
But Jesus Christ, as in the books ye find, 
Will that his glory last, and be in mind ; 
And, for the worship of his Mother dear, 
Yet may I sing, Alma I loud and clear. 

' This well of mercy, Jesu's Mother sweet, 
After my knowledge I have loved alway ; 
And in the hour when I my death did meet 
To me she came, and thus to me did say, 
" Thou in thy dying sing this holy lay," 
As ye have heard ; and soon as I had sung 
Methought she laid a grain upon my tongue. 

' Wherefore I sing, nor can from song refrain, 
In honour of that blissful Maiden free, 
TiU from my tongue off-taken is the grain ; 
And after that thus said she unto me : 
"My little Child, then will I come for thee 
Soon as the grain from off thy tongue they take : 
Be not dismayed, I will not thee forsake !"' 

This holy Monk, this Abbot — him mean I, 
Touched then his tongue, and took away the grair 
And he gave up the ghost full peacefully ; 
And, when the Abbot had this wonder seen, 
His salt tears trickled down like showers of rain 
And on his face he dropped upon the ground, 
And still he lay as if he had been bound. 

THE CUCKOO AND THE NIGHTINGALE. 

 

xxxrn. 
fee the whole Convent on the pavement lay, 
keeping and praising Jesu's Mother dear ; 
nd after that they rose, and took their way, 
nd lifted up this Martyr from the bier, 
tnd in a tomb of precious marble clear 
nclosed his uncorrupted body sweet. — 
Hiere'er he be, God grant us him to meet ! 

'oung Hew of Lincoln ! in like sort laid low 
y cursed Jews — thing well and widely known, 
)r it was done a little while ago — 
; ray also thou for us, while here we tarry 
I'eak sinful folk, that God, with pitying eye, 
. mercy would his mercy multiply 
. us, for reverence of his Mother Mary !" 

HE CUCKOO AND THE NIGHTINGALE. 

ie God of Love — ah, lenedicite I 
ovr mighty and how great a Lord is he ! 
j>r he of low hearts can make high, of high 
 can make low, and unto death bring nigh ; 
■id hard hearts he can make them land and free. 

ithin a little time, as hath been found, 
 can make sick folk whole and fresh and sound : 
lem who are whole in body and in mind, 
 can make sick, — bind can he and unbind 
 that he will have bound, or have unbound. 

tell his might my wit may not suffice ; 
iolish men he can make them out of wise ; — 
>r he may do all that he will devise ; 
ose livers he can make abate then' vice, 
id proud hearts can make tremble in a trice. 

brief, the whole of what he will, he may ; 
jainst him dare not any wight say nay ; 
humble or afflict whome'er he will, 
gladden or to grieve, he hath like skill ; 
.it most his might he sheds on the eve of May. 

For every true heart, gentle heart and free, 
That with him is, or thinketh so to be, 
Now againstMay shall have some stirring — whether 
To j oy, or be it to some mourning ; never 
At other time, methinks, in like degree. 
vr. 
For now when they may hear the small birds' song, 
And see the budding leaves the branches throng, 
This unto their remembrance doth bring 
All kinds of pleasure mix'd with sorrowing ; 
And longing of sweet thoughts that ever long. 

And of that longing heaviness doth come, 
Whence oft great sickness grows of heart and home; 
Sick are they all for lack of their desire ; 
And thus in May their hearts are set on fire, 
So that they burn forth in great martyrdom. 

In sooth, I speak from feeling, what though now 
Old am I, and to genial pleasure slow ; 
Yet have I felt of sickness through the May, 
Both hot and cold, and heart-aches every day, — 
How hard, alas ! to bear, I only know. 

Such shaking doth the fever in me keep 
Through all this May that I have little sleep ; 
And also 'tis not likely unto me, 
That any living heart should sleepy be 
In which Love's dart its fiery point doth steep. 

But tossing lately on a sleepless bed, 
I of a token thought which Lovers heed ; 
How among them it was a common tale, 
That it was good to hear the Nightingale, 
Ere the vile Cuckoo's note be uttered. 

And then I thought anon as it was day, 
I gladly would go somewhere to essay 
If I perchance a Nightingale might hear, 
For yet had I heard none, of all that year, 
And it was then the third night of the May. 

And soon as I a glimpse of day espied, 
No longer would I in my bed abide, 
But straightway to a wood that was hard by, 
Forth did I go, alone and fearlessly, 
And held the pathway down by a brook-side ; 

 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER. 

Till to a lawn I came all white and green, 
I in so fair a one had never been. 
The ground was green, with daisy powdered over; 
Tall were the flowers, the grove a lofty cover, 
All green and white ; and nothing else was seen. 

There sate I down among the fair fresh flowers, 
And saw the birds come tripping from their bowers, 
Where they had rested them all night ; and they, 
Who were so joyful at the light of day, 
Began to honour May with all their powers. 

Well did they know that service all by rote, 
And there was many and many a lovely note, 
Some, singing loud, as if they had complained ; 
Some with their notes another manner feigned ; 
And some did sing all out with the full throat. 

They pruned themselves, and made themselves right 
Dancing and leaping light upon the spray ; [gay, 
And ever two and two together were, 
The same as they had chosen for the year, 
Upon Saint Valentine's returning day. 


Meanwhile the stream, whose bank I sate upon, 
Was making such a noise as it ran on 
Accordant to the sweet Birds' harmony ; 
Methought that it was the best melody 
Which ever to man's ear a passage won. 

And for delight, but how I never wot, 
I in a slumber and a swoon was caught, 
Not all asleep and yet not waking wholly ; 
And as I lay, the Cuckoo, bird unholy, 
Broke silence, or I heard him in my thought. 

And that was right upon a tree fast by, 
And who was then ill satisfied but I ? 
Now, God, quoth I, that died upon the rood, 
From thee and thy base throat, keep all that's good, 
Full little joy have I now of thy cry. 

And, as I with the Cuckoo thus 'gan chide, 
In the next bush that was me fast beside, 
I heard the lusty Nightingale so sing, 
That her clear voice made a loud rioting, 
Echoing thorough all the green wood wide. 

Ah ! good sweet Nightingale ! for my heart's cheei 
Hence hast thou stay'd a little while too long ; 
For we have had the sorry Cuckoo here, 
And she hath been before thee with her song ; 
Evil light on her ! she hath done me wrong. 

But hear you now a wondrous thing, I pray ; 
As long as in that swooning-fit I lay, 
Methought I wist right well what these birds meant 
And had good knowing both of their intent, 
And of their speech, and all that they would say. 

The Nightingale thus in my hearing spake : — 
Good Cuckoo, seek some other bush or brake, 
And, prithee, let us that can sing dwell here ; 
For every wight eschews thy song to hear, 
Such uncouth singing verily dost thou make. 
XXIV. 
What! quoth she then, what is 't that ails thes now 
It seems to me I sing as well as thou; 
For mine 's a song that is both true and plain,— 
Although I cannot quaver so in vain 
As thou dost in thy throat, I wot not how. 

All men may understanding have of me, 
But, Nightingale, so may they not of thee ; 
For thou hast many a foolish and quaint cry :— 
Thou say'st Osee, Osee, then how may I 
Have knowledge, I thee pray, what this may be ! 

Ah, fool ! quoth she, wist thou not what it is ? 
Oft as I say Osee, Osee, I wis, 
Then mean I, that I should be wonderous fain 
That shamefully they one and all were slain, 
Whoever against Love mean aught amiss. 

And also would I that they all were dead, 
Who do not think in love their life to lead ; 
For who is loth the God of Love to obey, 
Is only fit to die, I dare well say, 
And for that cause Osee I cry ; take heed ! 

Ay, quoth the Cuckoo, that is a quaint law, 
That all must love or die ; but I withdraw, 
And take my leave of all such company, 
For mine intent it neither is to die, 
Nor ever while I five Love's yoke to draw. 

THE CUCKOO AND THE NIGHTINGALE. 

 

Por lovers of all folk that be alive, 
'he most disquiet have and least do thrive ; 
lost feeling have of sorrow woe and care, 
aid the least welfare coraeth to their share ; 
Vhat need is there against the truth to strive ? 

Vhat ! quoth she, thou art all out of thy mind, 
; 'hat in thy churlishness a cause canst find 
!'o speak of Love's true Servants in this mood ; 
'or in this world no service is so good 
I'o every wight that gentle is of kind. 
XXXI. 
''or thereof comes all goodness and all worth ; 
:dl gentiless and honour thence come forth ; 
.'hence worship comes, content and true heart's 
pleasure, 
nd full-assured trust, joy without measure, 
did jollity, fresh cheerfulness, and mirth ; 
XXXII. 
nd bounty, lowliness, and courtesy, 
iLnd seemliness, and faithful company, 
; L nd dread of shame that will not do amiss ; 
'or he that faithfully Love's servant is, 
'lather than be disgraced, would chuse to die. 

ind that the very truth it is which I 
Tow say — in such belief I ' live and die ; 
\ni Cuckoo, do thou so, by my advice. 
I'hen, quoth she, let me never hope for bliss, 
f with that counsel I do e'er comply. 
xxxiv. 
rood Nightingale ! thou speakest wondrous fair, 
/et for all that, the truth is found elsewhere ; 
? or Love in young folk is but rage, I wis ; 
ind Love in old folk a great dotage is ; 
Vho most it useth, him 'twill most impair. 
xxxv. 
i'or thereof come all contraries to gladness ; 
'hence sickness comes, and overwhelming sadness, 
listrust and jealousy, despite, debate, 
dishonour, shame, envy importunate, 
i'ride, anger, mischief, poverty, and madness. 

oving is aye an office of despair, 
nd one thing is therein which is not fair ; 
or whoso gets of love a little bliss, 
'nless it alway stay with him, I wis 
le may full soon go with an old man's hair. 

XXXVII. 
And, therefore, Nightingale ! do thou keep nigh, 
For trust me well, in spite of thy quaint cry, 
If long time from thy mate thou be, or far, 
Thou 'It be as others that forsaken are ; 
Then shalt thou raise a clamour as do I. 
XXXVIII. 
Fie, quoth she, on thy name, Bird ill beseen ! 
The God of Love afflict thee with all teen, 
For thou art worse than mad a thousand fold ; 
For many a one hath virtues manifold, 
Who had been nought, if Love had never been. 
XXXIX. 
For evermore his servants Love amendeth, 
And he from every blemish them defendeth ; 
And maketh them to burn, as hi a fire, 
In loyalty, and worshipful desire, 
And, when it likes him, joy enough them sendeth. 
XL. 
Thou Nightingale ! the Cuckoo said, be still, 
For Love no reason hath but his own will ; — 
For to th' untrue he oft gives ease and joy ; 
True lovers doth so bitterly annoy, 
He lets them perish through that grievous ill. 
XLI. 
With such a master would I never be ; 
For he, in sooth, is blind, and may not see, 
And knows not when he hurts and when he heals; 
Within this court full seldom Truth avails, 
So diverse in his wilfulness is he 
XLII. 
Then of the Nightingale did I take note, 
How from her inmost heart a sigh she brought, 
And said, Alas ! that ever I was born, 
Not one word have I now, I am so forlorn, — 
And with that word, she into tears burst out. 
XLIII. 
Alas, alas ! my very heart will break, 
Quoth she, to hear this churlish bird thus speak 
Of Love, and of his holy services ; 
Now, God of Love ! thou help me in some wise, 
That vengeance on this Cuckoo I may wreak. 
XLIV. 
And so methought I started up anon, 
And to the brook I ran and got a stone, 
Which at the Cuckoo hardily I cast, 
And he for dread did fly away full fast ; 
And glad, in sooth, was I when he was gone. 
 From a manuscript in the Bodleian, as are also stanzas 
 and , which are necessary to complete the sense. 

 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER. 

-I 

And as he flew, the Cuckoo, ever and aye, 
Kept crying, " Farewell ! — farewell, Popinjay ! 
As if in scornful mockery of me ; 
And on I hunted him from tree to tree, 
Till he was far, all out of sight, away. 

Then straightway came the Nightingale to me, 
And said, Forsooth, my friend, do I thank thee, 
That thou wert near to rescue me ; and now, 
Unto the God of Love I make a vow, 
That all this May I will thy songstress he. 

Well satisfied, I thanked her, and she said, 
By this mishap no longer be dismayed, 
Though thou the Cuckoo heard, ere thou heard ' st me ; 
Yet if I live it shall amended be, 
When next May comes, if I am not afraid. 
XLVIII. 
And one thing will I counsel thee also, 
The Cuckoo trust not thou, nor his Love's saw ; 
All that she said is an outrageous lie. 
Nay, nothing shall me bring thereto, quoth I, 
For Love, and it hath done me mighty woe. 

Yea, hath it ? use, quoth she, this medicine ; 
This May-time, every day before thou dine, 
Go look on the fresh daisy ; then say I, 
Although for pain thou may'st be like to die, 
Thou wilt be eased, and less wilt droop and pine. 

And mind always that thou be good and true, 
And I will sing one song, of many new, 
For love of thee, as loud as I may cry ; 
And then did she begin this song full high, 
' Beslirew all them that are in love untrue/ 

And soon as she had sung it to the end, 
Now farewell, quoth she, for I hence must wend ; 
And, God of Love, that can right well and may, 
Send unto thee as mickle joy this day, 
As ever he to Lover yet did send. 

Thus takes the Nightingale her leave of me ; 
I pray to God with her always to be, 
And joy of love to send her evermore ; 
And shield us from the Cuckoo and her lore, 
For there is not so false a bird as she. 

Forth then she flew, the gentle Nightingale, 
To all the Birds that lodged within that dale, 
And gathered each and all into one place ; 
And them besought to hear her doleful case, 
And thus it was that she began her tale. 
LIV. 
The Cuckoo — 'tis not well that I should hide 
How she and I did each the other chide, 
And without ceasing, since it was daylight ; 
And now I pray you all to do me right 
Of that false Bird whom Love can not abide. 

Then spake one Bird, and full assent all gave ; 
This matter asketh counsel good as grave, 
For birds we are — all here together brought ; 
And, in good sooth, the Cuckoo here is not ; 
And therefore we a Parliament will have. 

And thereat shall the Eagle be our Lord, 
And other Peers whose names are on record ; 
A summons to the Cuckoo shall be sent, 
And judgment there be given ; or that intent 
Failing, we finally shall make accord. 
I/VII. 
And all this shall be done, without a nay, 
The morrow after Saint Valentine's day, 
Under a maple that is well beseen, 
Before the chamber-window of the Queen, 
At Woodstock, on the meadow green and gay. 
Lvni. 
She thanked them ; and then her leave she took, 
And flew into a hawthorn by that brook ; 
And there she sate and sung — upon that tree — 
"For term of life Love shall have hold of me" — 
So loudly, that I with that song awoke. 
Unlearned Book and rude, as well I know, 
For beauty thou hast none, nor eloquence, 
Who did on thee the hardiness bestow 
To appear before my Lady ? but a sense 
Thou surely hast of her benevolence, 
Whereof her hourly bearing proof doth give ', 
For of all good she is the best alive. 
Alas, poor Book ! for thy unworthiness, 
To show to her some pleasant meanings writ 
In winning words, since through her gentikss, 
Thee she accepts as for her service fit ! 
Oh ! it repents me I have neither wit 
Nor leisure unto thee more worth to give ; 
For of all good she is the best alive. 

TROILUS AND CRESIDA. 

 

sseech her meekly with all lowliness, 
aough I be far from her I reverence, 
) think upon my truth and stedfastness, 
ad to abridge my sorrow's violence, 
tused by the wish, as knows your sapience, 
le of her liking proof to me would give ; 
r of all good she is the best alive. 
l'envot. 
easure's Aurora, Day of gladsomeness ! 
ma by night, with heavenly influence 
iimined ! root of beauty and goodnesse, 
rite, and allay, by your beneficence, 
|r sighs breathed forth iu silence, — comfort give 
ice of all good, you are the best alive. 
EXPLICIT. 

TROILUS AND CRESIDA. 
I :xt morning Troilus began to clear 
s eyes from sleep, at the first break of day, 
id unto Pandarus, his own Brother dear, 
r love of God, full piteously did say, 
e must the Palace see of Cresida ; 
r since we yet may have no other feast, 
t us behold her Palace at the least ! 
Ad therewithal to cover his intent 
cause he found into the Town to go, 
d they right forth to Cresid's Palace went ; 
t, Lord, this simple Troilus was woe, 
m thought his sorrowful heart would break in two ; 
- r when he saw her doors fast bolted all, 
sll nigh for sorrow down he 'gan to fall. 
' erewith when this true Lover 'gan behold, 
w shut was every window of the place, 
ie frost he thought his heart was icy cold ; 
t which, with changed, pale, and deadly face, 
thout word uttered, forth he 'gan to pace ; 
d on his purpose bent so fast to ride, 
' at no wight his continuance espied. 
I en said he thus, — O Palace desolate ! 
' aouse of houses, once so richly dight ! 
iPalace empty and disconsolate ! 
iou lamp of which extinguished is the light ; 
Palace whilom day that now art night, 
ou onght'st to fall and I to die ; since she 
gone who held us both in sovereignty. 

, of all houses once the crowned boast ! 
Palace illumined with the sun of bliss ; 
ring of which the ruby now is lost, 
cause of woe, that cause has been of bliss : 
Yet, since I may no better, would I kiss 
Thy cold doors ; but I dare not for this rout ; 
Farewell, thou shrine of which the Saint is out ! 
Therewith he cast on Pandarus an eye, 
With changed face, and piteous to behold ; 
And when he might his time aright espy, 
Aye as he rode, to Pandarus he told 
Both his new sorrow and his joys of old, 
So piteously, and with so dead a hue, 
That every wight might on his sorrow rue. 
Forth from the spot he rideth up and down, 
And everything to his rememberance 
Came as he rode by places of the town 
Where he had felt such perfect pleasure once 
Lo, yonder saw I mine own Lady dance, 
And in that Temple she with her bright eyes, 
My Lady dear, first bound me captive-wise. 
And yonder with joy-smitten heart have I 
Heard my own Cresid's laugh ; and once at play 
 yonder saw her eke full blissfully ; 
And yonder once she unto me 'gan say — 
Now, my sweet Troilus, love me well, I pray ! 
And there so graciously did me behold, 
That hers unto the death my heart I hold. 
And at the corner of that self-same house 
Heard I my most beloved Lady dear, 
So womanly, with voice melodious 
Singing so well, so goodly, and so clear, 
That in my soul methinks I yet do hear 
The blissful sound ; and in that very place 
My Lady first me took unto her grace. 
O blissful God of Love ! then thus he cried, 
When I the process have in memory, 
How thou hast wearied me on every side, 
Men thence a book might make, a history ; 
What need to seek a conquest over me, 
Since I am wholly at thy will  what joy 
Hast thou thy own liege subjects to destroy ? 
Dread Lord ! so fearful when provoked, thine ire 
Well hast thou wreaked on me by pain and grief ; 
Now mercy, Lord ! thou know'st well I desire 
Thy grace above all pleasures first and chief; 
And five and die I will in thy belief ; 
For which I ask for guerdon but one boon, 
That Cresida again thou send me soon. 

 

SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER. 

Constrain her heart as quickly to return, 
As thou dost mine with longing her to see, 
Then know I well that she would not sojourn. 
Now, blissful Lord, so cruel do not be 
Unto the blood of Troy, I pray of thee, 
As Juno was unto the Theban blood, 
From whence to Thebes came griefs in multitude. 
And after this he to the gate did go 
Whence Cresid rode, as if in haste she was ; 
And up and down there went, and to and fro, 
And to himself full oft he said, alas ! 
From hence my hope, and solace forth did pass. 
would the blissful God now for his joy, 
 might her see again coming to Troy ! 
And up to yonder hill was I her guide ; 
Alas, and there I took of her my leave ; 
Yonder I saw her to her Father ride, 
For very grief of which my heart shall cleave ;— 
And hither home I came when it was eve ; 
And here I dwell an outcast from all joy, 
And shall, unless I see her soon in Troy. 
And of himself did he imagine oft, 
Tli at he was blighted, pale, and waxen less 
Than he was wont ; and that in whispers soft 
Men said, what may it be, can no one guess 
Why Troilus hath all this heaviness ? 
All which he of himself conceited wholly 
Out of his weakness and his melancholy. 
Another time he took into his head, 
That every wight, who in the way passed by, 
Had of him ruth, and fancied that they said, 
I am right sorry Troilus will die : 
And thus a day or two drove wearily ; 
As ye have heard ; such life 'gan he to lead 
As one that standeth betwixt hope and dread. 
For which it pleased him in his songs to show 
The occasion of his woe, as best he might ; 
And made a fitting song, of words but few, 
Somewhat his woeful heart to make more light ; 
And when he was removed from all men's sight, 
With a soft night voice, he of his Lady dear, 
That absent was, 'gaii sing as ye may hear. 
O star, of which I lost have all the light, 
With a sore heart well ought I to bewail, 
That ever dark in torment, night by night, 
Toward my death with wind I steer and sail ; 

For which upon the tenth night if thou fail 
With thy bright beams to guide me but one horn 
My ship and me Charybdis will devour. 
As soon as he this song had thus sung through, 
He fell again into his sorrows old ; 
And every night, as was his wont to do, 
Troilus stood the bright moon to behold ; 
And all his trouble to the moon he told, 
And said ; I wis, when thou art horn'd anev, 
I shall be glad if all the world be true. 
Thy horns were old as now upon that morrow, 
When hence did journey my bright Lady dear, 
That cause is of my torment and my sorrow ; 
For which, oh, gentle Luna, bright and clear, 
For love of God, run fast above thy sphere: 
For when thy horns begin once more to spring, 
Then shall she come, that with her bliss may brim 
The day is more, and longer every night 
Than they were wont to be — for he thought so ; 
And that the sun did take his course not right. 
By longer way than he was wont to go ; 
And said, I am in constant dread I trow, 
That Phaeton his son is yet alive, 
His too fond father's car amiss to drive. 
Upon the walls fast also would he walk, 
To the end that he the Grecian host might see ; 
And ever thus he to himself would talk : — 
Lo ! yonder is my own bright Lady free ; 
Or yonder is it that the tents must be ; 
And thence does come this ah' which is so sweet, 
That in my soul I feel the joy of it. 
And certainly this wind, that more and more 
By moments thus increaseth in my face, 
Is of my Lady's sighs heavy and sore ; 
I prove it thus ; for in no other space 
Of all this town, save only in this place, 
Feel I a wind, that soundeth so like pain ; 
It saith, Alas, why severed are we twain \ 
A weary while in pain he tosseth thus, 
Till fully past and gone was the ninth night ; 
And ever at his side stood Pandarus, 
Who busily made use of all his might 
To comfort him, and make his heart more light ; 
Giving him always hope, that she the mornw 
Of the tenth day will come, and end his sorrow. 



POEMS REFERRING TO THE PERIOD OF OLD AGE. 


 

POEMS REFERRING TO THE PERIOD OF OLD AGE. 

; THE OLD CUMBERLAND BEGGAR. 
e class of Beggars, to which the Old Man here described 
)elongs,will probably soon be extinct. It consisted of poor, 
md, mostly, old and infirm persons, who confined them- 
elve to a stated round in their neighbourhood, and 
lad certain fixed days, on which, at different houses, 
hey regularly received alms, sometimes in money, but 
;nost!y in provisions. 
jaw an aged Beggar in my walk ; 
id he was seated, by the highway side, 
V a low structure of rude masonry 
ilt at the foot of a huge hill, that they 
ho lead their horses down the steep rough road 
iy thence remount at ease. The aged Man 
Id placed his staff across the broad smooth stone 
lat overlays the pile ; and, from a bag 
 white with flour, the dole of village dames, 
]; drew his scraps and fragments, one by one ; 
. d scanned them with a fixed and serious look 
'idle computation. In the sun, 
'on the second step of that small pile, 
I -rounded by those wild unpeopled hills, 
Ij sat, and ate his food in solitude : 
id ever, scattered from his palsied hand, 
r ,at, still attempting to prevent the waste, 
I is baffled still, the crumbs hi little showers 
I I on the ground ; and the small mountain birds, 
It venturing yet to peck their destined meal, 
iiproached within the length of half his staff. 
. 
lim from my childhood have I known ; and then 
I was so old, he seems not older now ; 
I travels on, a solitary Man, 
^helpless in appearance, that for him 
B sauntering Horseman throws not with a slack 
m careless hand his alms upon the ground, 
R stops, — that he may safely lodge the coin 
^,;hin the old Man's hat ; nor quits him so, 
I still, when he has given his horse the rein, 
\tches the aged Beggar with a look 
Sblong, and half-reverted. She who tends 
' toll-gate, when in summer at her door 
S; turns her wheel, if on the road she sees 
 aged beggar coming, quits her work, 
™l lifts the latch for him that he may pass. 

The post-boy, when his rattling wheels o'ertake 
The aged Beggar in the woody lane, 
Shouts to him from behind ; and, if thus warned 
The old man does not change his course, the boy 
Turns with, less noisy wheels to the roadside, 
And passes gently by, without a curse 
Upon his lips, or anger at his heart. 
He travels on, a solitary Man ; 
His age has no companion. On the ground 
His eyes are turned, and, as he moves along, 
They move along the ground ; and, evermore, 
Instead of common and habitual sight 
Of fields with rural works, of hill and dale, 
And the blue sky, one little span of earth 
Is all his prospect. Thus, from day to day, 
Bow-bent, his eyes for ever on the ground, 
He plies his weary journey ; seeing still, 
And seldom knowing that he sees, some straw, 
Some scattered leaf, or marks which, in one track, 
The nails of cart or chariot-wheel have left 
Impressed on the white road, — in the same line, 
At distance still the same. Poor Traveller ! 
His staff trails with him ; scarcely do his feet 
Disturb the summer dust ; he is so still 
In look and motion, that the cottage curs, 
Ere he has passed the door, will turn away, 
Weary of barking at Mm. Boys and girls, 
The vacant and the busy, maids and youths, 
And urchins newly breeched — all pass him by : 
Him even the slow-paced waggon leaves behind. 
But deem not this Man useless. — Statesmen ! ye 
Who are so restless in your wisdom, ye 
Who have a broom still ready in your hands 
To rid the world of nuisances ; ye proud, 
Heart-swoln, while in your pride ye contemplate 
Your talents, power, or wisdom, deem him not 
A burthen of the earth ! 'Tis Nature's law 
That none, the meanest of created things, 
Of forms created the most vile and brute, 
The dullest or most noxious, should exist 
Divorced from good — a spirit and pulse of good, 
A life and soul, to every mode of being 
Inseparably linked. Then be assured 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

That least of all can ought — that ever owned 
The heaven-regarding eye and front sublime 
Which man is born to — sink, howe'er depressed, 
So low as to be scorned without a sin ; 
Without offence to God cast out of view; 
Like the dry remnant of a garden-flower 
Whose seeds are shed, or as an implement 
Worn out and worthless. While from door to door, 
This old Man creeps, the villagers in him 
Behold a record which together binds 
Past deeds and offices of charity, 
Else unremembered, and so keeps alive 
The kindly mood in hearts which lapse of years, 
And that half-wisdom half-experience gives, 
Make slow to feel, and by sure steps resign 
To selfishness and cold oblivious cares. 
Among the farms and solitary huts, 
Hamlets and thinly-scattered villages, 
Where'er the aged Beggar takes his rounds, 
The mild necessity of use compels 
To acts of love ; and habit does the work 
Of reason ; yet prepares that after-joy 
Which reason cherishes. And thus the soul, 
By that sweet taste of pleasure unpursued, 
Doth find herself insensibly disposed 
To virtue and true goodness. 
Some there are, 
By their good works exalted, lofty minds 
And meditative, authors of delight 
And happiness, which to the end of time 
Will live, and spread, and kindle : even such minds 
In childhood, from this solitary Being, 
Or from like wanderer, haply have received 
(A thing more precious far than all that books 
Or the solicitudes of love can do !) 
That first mild touch of sympathy and thought, 
In which they found their kindred with a world 
Where want and sorrow were. The easy man 
Who sits at his own door, — and, like the pear 
That overhangs his head from the green wall, 
Feeds in the sunshine ; the robust and young, 
The prosperous and unthinking, they who five 
Sheltered, and flourish in a little grove 
Of their own kindred ; — all behold in him 
A silent monitor, which on their minds 
Must needs impress a transitory thought 
Of self-congratulation, to the heart 
Of each recalling his peculiar boons, 
His charters and exemptions; and, perchance, 
Though he to no one give the fortitude 
And circumspection needful to preserve 
His present blessings, and to husband up 
The respite of the season, he, at least, 
And 'tis no vulgar service, makes them felt. 

Yet further. Many, I believe, there are 
Who live a life of virtuous decency, 
Men who can hear the Decalogue and feel 
No self-reproach ; who of the moral law 
Established in the land where they abide 
Are strict observers ; and not negligent 
In acts of love to those with whom they dwell, 
Their kindred, and the children of their blood. 
Praise be to such, and to their slumbers peace ! 
• — But of the poor man ask, the abject poor ; 
Go, and demand of him, if there be here 
In this cold abstinence from evil deeds, 
And these inevitable charities, 
Wherewith to satisfy the human soul? 
No — man is dear to man ; the poorest poor 
Long for some moments in a weary life 
When they can know and feel that they have bee 
Themselves, the fathers and the dealers-out 
Of some small blessings ; have been kind to such 
As needed kindness, for this single cause, 
That we have all of us one human heart. 
— Such pleasure is to one kind Being known, 
My neighbour, when with punctual care, each wei 
Duly as Friday comes, though pressed herself 
By her own wants, she from her store of meal 
Takes one unsparing handful for the scrip 
Of this old Mendicant, and, from her door 
Returning with exhilarated heart, 
Sits by her fire, and builds her hope in heaven. 
Then let him pass, a blessing on his head ! 
And while in that vast solitude to which 
The tide of things has borne him, he appears 
To breathe and live but for himself alone, 
Unblamed, uninjured, let him bear about 
The good which the benignant law of Heaven 
Has hung around him : and, while life is his, 
Still let him prompt the unlettered villagers 
To tender offices and pensive thoughts. 
— Then let him pass, a blessing on his head ! 
And, long as he can wander, let him breaths 
The freshness of the valleys ; let his blood 
Struggle with frosty air and winter snou s ; 
And let the chartered wind that sweeps the hwi 
Beat his grey locks against his withered face. 
Reverence the hope whose vital anxiousnoss 
Gives the last human interest to his heart. 
May never House, misnamed of Industry, 
Make him a captive ! — for that pent-up din, 
Those life-consuming sounds that clog the air, 
Be his the natural silence of old age ! 
Let him be free of mountain solitudes ; 
And have around him, whether heard or not, 
! The pleasant melody of woodland birds. 

THE PERIOD OF OLD AGE. 

 

iiv are his pleasures : if his eyes have now 
Ibn doomed so long to settle upon earth 
Git not without some effort they behold 
m countenance of the horizontal sun, 
 ing or setting, let the light at least 
Ida free entrance to their languid orbs. 
/I let him, where and when he will, sit down 
Death the trees, or on a grassy bank 
Ciighway side, and with the little birds 
Sire his chance-gathered meal ; and, finally, 
I in the eye of Nature he has lived, 
S n the eye of Nature let him die ! 
. 

THE FARMER OF TILSBURY VALE. 
") not for the unfeeling, the falsely refined, 
T squeamish in taste, and the narrow of mind, 
A . the small critic wielding his delicate pen, 
T   sing of old Adam, the pride of old men. 

H iwells in the centre of London's wide Town ; 
H staff is a sceptre — his grey hairs a crown ; 
V his bright eyes look brighter, set off by the 
streak 
lie unfaded rose that still blooms on his cheek. 
M the dews, in the sunshine of mom, — 'mid the 
joy 
e fields, he collected that bloom, when a boy ; 
T!,; countenance there fashioned, which, spite of 
a stain 
his life hath received, to the last will remain. 

Ajarmer he was ; and his house far and near 
V the boast of the country for excellent cheer 
H, eft have I heard in sweet Tilsbury Vale 
lie silver-rimmed horn whence he dealt his 
mild ale ! 

• Adam was far as the farthest from ruin, 
H fields seemed to know what their Master was 
doing; 
turnips, and corn-land, and meadow, and lea, 
aught the infection — as generous as he. 

¥' Adam prized little the feast and the bowl, — 
H fields better suited the ease of his soul : 
Strayed through the fields like an indolent wight, 
flj quiet of nature was Adam's delight. 

For Adam was simple in thought ; and the poor, 
Familiar with him, made an inn of his door : 
He gave them the best that he had ; or, to say 
What less may mislead you, they took it away. 
Thus thirty smooth years did he thrive on his farm: 
The Genius of plenty preserved him from harm : 
At length, what to most is a season of sorrow, 
His means are run out, — he must beg, or must 
borrow. 
To the neighbours he went, — all were free with 
their money ; 
For his hive had so long been replenished with 
honey, 
That they dreamt not of dearth ; — He continued 
his rounds, 
Knocked here — and knocked there, pounds still 
adding to pounds. 
He paid what he could with his ill-gotten pelf, 
And something, it might be, reserved for himself : 
Then (what is too true) without hinting a word, 
Turned his back on the country — and off like a bird. 
You lift up your eyes! — but I guess that you frame 
A judgment too harsh of the sin and the shame ; 
In him it was scarcely a business of art, 
For this he did all in the ease of his heart. 
To London — a sad emigration I ween — 
With his grey hairs he went from the brook and 
the green ; 
And there, with small wealth but his legs and his 
hands, 
As lonely he stood as a crow on the sands. 
All trades, as need was, did old Adam assume, — 
Served as stable-boy, errand-boy, porter, and groom ; 
But nature is gracious, necessity kind, 
And, in spite of the shame that may lurk in his 
mind, 
He seems ten birthdays younger, is green and is 
stout ; 
Twice as fast as before does his blood run about ; 
You would say that each hair of his beard was alive, 
And his fingers are busy as bees in a hive. 
For he 's not like an Old Man that leisurely goes 
About work that he knows, in a track that he knows ; 
But often his mind is compelled to demur, 
And you guess that the more then his body must stir. 

 

POEMS REFERRING TO 

In the throng of the town like a stranger is he, 
Like one whose own country's far over the sea; 
And Nature, while through the great city he hies, 
Full ten times a day takes his heart by surprise. 
This gives him the fancy of one that is young, 
More of soul in his face than of words on his tongue ; 
Like a maiden of twenty he trembles and sighs, 
And tears of fifteen will come into his eyes. 
What 's a tempest to him, or the dry parching heats? 
Yet he watches the clouds that pass over the streets; 
With a look of such earnestness often will stand, 
You might think he 'd twelve reapers at work in 
the Strand. 
Where proud Covent-garden, in desolate hours 
Of snow and hoar-frost, spreads her fruits and her 
flowers, 
Old Adam will smile at the pains that have made 
Poor winter look fine in such strange masquerade. 
'Mid coaches and chariots, a waggon of straw, 
Like a magnet, the heart of old Adam can draw ; 
With a thousand soft pictures his memory will teem, 
And his hearing is touched with the sounds of a 
dream. 
Up the Haymarket hill he oft whistles his way, 
Thrusts his hands in a waggon, and smells at the hay ; 
He thinks of the fields he so often hath mown, 
And is happy as if the rich freight were his own. 
But chiefly to Smithfield he loves to repair, — 
If you pass by at morning, you ' meet with him 
there. 
The breath of the cows you may see him inhale, 
And his heart all the while is in Tilsbury Vale. 
Now farewell, old Adam ! when low thou art laid, 
May one blade of gi'ass spring up over thy head ; 
And I hope that thy grave, wheresoever it be, 
Will hear the wind sigh through the leaves of a tree. 
. 

THE SMALL CELANDINE. 
There is a Flower, the lesser Celandine, 
That shrinks, like many more, from cold and rain : 
And, the first moment that the sun may shine, 
Bright as the sun himself, 'tis out again ! 

When hailstones have been falling, swarm 
swarm, 
Or blasts the green field and the trees distrest. 
Oft have I seen it muffled up from harm, 
In close self -shelter, like a Thing at rest. 
But lately, one rough day, this Flower  passed 
And recognised it, though an altered form, 
Now standing forth an offering to the blast, 
And buffeted at will by rain and storm. 
I stopped, and said with inly-muttered voice 
" It doth not love the shower, nor seek the cold 
This neither is its courage nor its choice, 
But its necessity in being old. 
The sunshine may not cheer it, nor the dew • 
It camiot help itself in its decay ; 
Stiff in its members, withered, changed of hue.' : 
And, in my spleen, I smiled that it was grey. 
To be a Prodigal's Favourite — then, worse trut 
A Miser's Pensioner — behold our lot ! 
Man, that from thy fair and shining youth 
Age might but take the things Youth needed m 
 

THE TWO THIEVES; 
OR, 
THE LAST STAGE OP AVARICE. 
now that the genius of Bewick were mine, 
And the skill which he learned on the banks of 
Tyne, 
Then the Muses might deal with me just as tl 
chose, 
For I 'd take my last leave both of vere mi 
prose. 
What feats would I work with my magical ban 
Book-learning and books should be banished 
land : 
And, for hunger and thirst and such troableso 
calls, 
Every ale-house should then have a feast on 
walls. 
The traveller would hang his wet clothes on a chajj 
Let them smoke, let them burn, not a straw woi 
-he care ! 
For the Prodigal Son, Joseph's Dream and 
sheaves, 
Oh, what woidd they be to my tale of two Thievi 

THE PERIOD OF OLD AGE. 

 

' e One, yet unbreeched, is not three birthdays old, 
]s Grandsire that age more than thirty times told ; 
'ere are ninety good seasons of fair and foul 
•weather 
Itween them, and both go a-pilfering together. 
th chips is the carpenter strewing bis floor ? 
] i cart-load of turf at an old woman's door ? 
(. Daniel his hand to the treasure will slide ! 
id his Grandson 's as busy at work by his side. 
C Daniel begins ; he stops short — and his eye, 
 -ough the lost look of dotage, is cunning and sly : 
: ' ; a look which at this time is hardly his own, 
I ; tells a plain tale of the days that are flown. 
I once had a heart which was moved by the wires 
C manifold pleasures and many desires : 
il what if he cherished his purse ? : Twas no 
more 
 n treading a path trod by thousands before. 
'". as a path trod by thousands ; but Daniel is one 
\ o went something farther than others have gone, 
.-  now with old Daniel you see how it fares ; 
see to what end he has brought his grey hairs. 

 pair sally forth hand in hand : ere the sun 
E. peered o'er the beeches, their work is begun : 
A[ yet, into whatever sin they may fall, 
ft child but half knows it, and that not at all. 
! v hunt through the streets with deliberate tread, 
A;, each, in his turn, becomes leader or led ; 
, wherever they carry their plots and their 
wiles, 
E ry face in the village is dimpled with smiles. 

Neither checked by the rich nor the needy they 
roam ; 
For the grey-headed Sire has a daughter at home, 
Who will gladly repair aU the damage that 's done; 
And three, were it asked, would be rendered for one. 
Old Man ! whom so oft I with pity have eyed, 
I love thee, and love the sweet Boy at thy side : 
Long yet may'st thou live I for a teacher we see 
That lifts up the veil of our nature in thee. 
. 

ANIMAL TRANQUILLITY AND DECAY. 
The little hedgerow birds, 
That peck along the road, regard him not. 
He travels on, and in his face, his step, 
His gait, is one expression : every limb, 
His look and bending figure, all bespeak 
A man who does not move with pain, but moves 
With thought. — He is insensibly subdued 
To settled quiet : he is one by whom 
All effort seems forgotten ; one to whom 
Long patience hath such mild composure given, 
That patience now doth seem a tiling of which 
He hath no need. He is by nature led 
To peace so perfect that the young behold 
With envy, what the Old Man hardly feels. 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

EPITAPHS 
TRANSLATED FROM CHIABKEKA. 
I. 
Weep not, beloved Friends ! nor let the air 
For me with sighs be troubled. Not from life 
Have I been taken ; this is genuine life 
And this alone — the life which now I live 
In peace eternal ; where desire and joy 
Together move in fellowship without end. — 
Francesco Ceni willed that, after death, 
His tombstone thus should speak for him. And 
surely 
Small cause there is for that fond wish of ours 
Long to continue in this world ; a world 
That keeps not faith, nor yet can point a hope 
To good, whereof itself is destitute. 

Perhaps some needful service of the State 
Drew Titus from the depth of studious bowers, 
And doomed him to contend in faithless courts, 
Where gold determines between right and wrong. 
Yet did at length his loyalty of heart, 
And his pure native genius, lead him back 
To wait upon the bright and gracious Muses, 
Whom he had early loved. And not in vain 
Such course he held ! Bologna's learned schools 
Were gladdened by the Sage's voice, and hung 
With fondness on those sweet Nestorian strains. 
There pleasure crowned his days ; and all his 
thoughts 
A roseate fragrance breathed. — human life, 
That never art secure from dolorous change ! 
Behold a high injunction suddenly 
To Arno's side hath brought him, and he charmed 
A Tuscan audience : but full soon was called 
To the perpetual silence of the grave. 
Mourn, Italy, the loss of him who stood 
A Champion stedfast and invincible, 
To quell the rage of literary War ! 

 Ivi vivea giocondo e i suoi pensieri 
Erano tutti rose. 
The Translator had not skill to come nearer to his original. 

Thou w T ho movest onward with a mind 
Intent upon thy way, pause, though in hasw ! 
'Twill be no fruitless moment. I was born 
Within Savona's walls, of gentle blood. 
On Tiber's banks my youth was dedicate 
To sacred studies ; and the Roman Shepherd 
Gave to my charge Urbino's numerous flock. 
Well did I watch, much laboured, nor had powt 
To escape from many and strange indignities ; 
Was smitten by the great ones of the world, 
But did not fall ; for Virtue braves all shocks, 
Upon herself resting immoveably. 
Me did a kindlier fortune then invite 
To serve the glorious Henry, King of France, 
And in his hands I saw a high reward 
Stretched out for my acceptance, — but Death 
Now, Reader, learn from this my fate, how l.i!- 
How treacherous to her promise, is the world ; 
And trust in God — to whose eternal doom 
Must bend the sceptred Potentates of earth. 

There never breathed a man who, when hi- li 
Was closing, might not of that life relate 
Toils long and hard. — The warrior will report 
Of wounds, and bright swords flashing in the fi< 
And blast of trumpets. He who hath beec doon 
To bow his forehead in the courts of kings, 
Will tell of fraud and never-ceasing hate, 
Envy and heart-inquietude, derived 
From intricate cabals of treacherous friends. 
I, who on shipboard lived from earliest youth, 
Could represent the countenance horrible 
Of the vexed waters, and the indignant rage 
Of Auster and Bootes Fifty years 
Over the well-steered galleys did T rule : — 
From huge Pelorus to the Atlantic pillars, 
Rises no mountain to mine eyes unknown ; 
And the broad gulfs I traversed oft and oft 
Of every cloud which in the heavens might stir 
I knew the force ; and hence the rough sea's pr 
Availed not to my Vessel's overthrow. 
What noble pomp and frequent have not I 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

 

i regal decks beheld ! yet in the end 
earned that one poor moment can suffice 
equalise the lofty and the low. 
e sail the sea of life — a Calm One finds, 
id One a Tempest — and, the voyage o'er, 
■ath is the quiet haven of us all. 
more of my condition ye would know, 
vona was my birth-place, and I sprang 
noble parents : seventy years and three 
re( j J — then yielded to a slow disease. 

I ue is it that Ambrosio Salinero 
ith an untoward fate was long involved 
odious litigation ; and full long, 
te harder still ! had he to endure assaults 
i racking malady. And true it is 
' at not the less a frank courageous heart 
. d buoyant spirit triumphed over pain ; 
{ d he was strong to follow in the steps 
I I the fair Muses. Not a covert path 
Jiids to the dear Parnassian forest's shade, 
'.(at might from him be hidden ; not a track 
lunts to' pellucid Hippocrene, but he 
 d traced its windings. — This Savona knows, 
'it no sepulchral honors to her Son 
.'b paid, for in our age the heart is ruled 
■y by gold. And now a simple stone 
licribed with this memorial here is raised 
lj his bereft, his lonely, Chiabrera. 
j ink not, Passenger ! who read'st the lines 
u an exceeding love hath dazzled me ; 
I — he was One whose memory ought to spread 
'lere'er Permessus bears an honoured name, 
M live as long as its pure stream shall flow. 

 TINED to war from very infancy 
I is I, Roberto Dati, and I took 
 Malta the white symbol of the Cross : 
u' in life's vigorous season did I shun 
 zard or toil ; among the sands was seen 
( Libya ; and not seldom, on the banks 
' wide Hungarian Danube, 'twas my lot 
hear the sanguinary trumpet sounded, 
''lived I, and repined not at such fate : 
" s only grieves me, for it seems a wrong, 
i it stripped of arms I to my end am brought 
- j the soft down of my paternal home. 
\ haply Arno shall be spared all cause 
liblush for me. Thou, loiter not nor halt 
■hy appointed way, and bear in mind 
I v fleeting and how frail is human life ! 

O flower of all that springs from gentle blood, 
And all that generous nurture breeds to make 
Youth amiable ; O friend so true of soul 
To fair Aglaia ; by what envy moved, 
Lelius ! has death cut short thy brilliant day 
In its sweet opening ? and what dire mishap 
Has from Savona torn her best delight ? 
For thee she mourns, nor e'er will cease to mourn ; 
And, should the out-pourings of her eyes suffice not 
For her heart's grief, she will entreat Sebeto 
Not to withhold his bounteous aid, Sebeto 
Who saw thee, on his margin, yield to death, 
In the chaste arms of thy beloved Love ! 
What profit riches? what does youth avail? 
Dust are our hopes ; — I, weeping bitterly, 
Penned these sad lines, nor can forbear to pray 
That every gentle Spirit hither led 
May read them not without some bitter tears. 

Not without heavy grief of heart did He 
On whom the duty fell (for at that time 
The father sojourned in a distant land) 
Deposit in the hollow of this tomb 
A brother's Child, most tenderly beloved ! 
Francesco was the name the Youth had borne, 
Pozzobonnelli his illustrious house ; 
And, when beneath this stone the Corse was laid, 
The eyes of all Savona streamed with tears. 
Alas ! the twentieth April of his life 
Had scarcely flowered : and at this early time, 
By genuine virtue he inspired a hope 
That greatly cheered Ins country : to his kin 
He promised comfort ; and the flattering thoughts 
His friends had in their fondness entertained, 
He suffered not to languish or decay. 
Now is there not good reason to break forth 
Into a passionate lament ? — Soul ! 
Short while a Pilgrim in our nether world, 
Do thou enjoy the calm empyreal air ; 
And round this earthly tomb let roses rise, 
An everlasting spring ! in memory 
Of that delightful fragrance which was once 
From thy mild manners quietly exhaled. 

 In justice to the Author, I subjoin the original :— 
e degli amici 
Non lasciava languire i bei pensieri. 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

Pause, courteous Spirit! — Balbi supplicates 
That Thou, with no reluctant voice, for him 
Here laid in mortal darkness, wouldst prefer 
A prayer to the Redeemer of the world. 
This to the dead by sacred right belongs ; 
All else is nothing. — Did occasion suit 
To tell his worth, the marble of this tomb 
Would ill suffice : for Plato's lore sublime, 
And all the wisdom of the Stagyrite, 
Enriched and beautified his studious mind : 
With Archimedes also he conversed 
As with a chosen friend ; nor did he leave 
Those laureat wreaths ungathered which 
Nymphs 
Twine near their loved Permessus. — Finally, 
Himself above each lower thought uplifting, 
His ears he closed to listen to the songs 
Which Sion's Kings did consecrate of old ; 
And his Permessus found on Lebanon. 
A blessed Man ! who of protracted days 
Made not, as thousands do, a vulgar sleep ; 
But truly did He live his life. Urbino, 
Take pride in him ! — Passenger, farewell ! 

the 

By a blest Husband guided, Mary came 
From nearest kindred, Vernon her new name ; 
She came, though meek of soul, in seemly pride 
Of happiness and hope, a youthful Bride. 
O dread reverse ! if aught be so, which proves 
That God will chasten whom he dearly loves. 
Faith bore her up through pains in mercy given, 
And troubles that were each a step to Heaven : 
Two Babes were laid in earth before she died j 
A third now slumbers at the Mother's side ; 
Its Sister-twin survives, whose smiles afford 
A trembling solace to her widowed Lord. 
Reader ! if to thy bosom cling the pain 
Of recent sorrow combated in vain ; 
Or if thy cherished grief have failed to thwart 
Time still intent on his insidious part, 
Lulling the mourner's best good thoughts asleep, 
Pilfering regrets we would, but cannot, keep ; 
Bear with Him— judge Him gently who makes lcnown 
His bitter loss by this memorial Stone ; 
And pray that in his faithful breast the grace 
Of resignation find a hallowed place. 

Six months to six years added he remained 
Upon this sinful earth, by sin unstained : 
blessed Lord ! whose mercy then removed 
A Child whom every eye that looked on loved ■ 
Support us, teach us calmly to resign 
What we possessed, and now is wholly thine ! 

CENOTAPH. 

In affectionate remembrance of Frances Fermor. who 
remains are deposited in the church of Claines, near W 
cester, this stone is erected by her sister, Dame Marpm 
wife of Sir George Beaumont, Bart., who, feeling nolle 
than the love of a brother for the deceased, comment 
this memorial to the care of his heirs and successors id ti 
possession of this place. 
By vain affections unenthralled, 
Though resolute when duty called 
To meet the world's broad eye, 
Pure as the holiest cloistered nun 
That ever feared the tempting sun, 
Did Fermor live and die. 
This Tablet, hallowed by her name, 
One heart-relieving tear may claim ; 
But if the pensive gloom 
Of fond regret be still thy choice, 
Exalt thy spirit, hear the voice 
Of Jesus from her tomb ! 
' I AM THE WAY, THE TRUTH, AND THE UN.' 

EPITAPH 

IN THE CHAPEL-YAKD OF LANGDALE, WESTMORELAND. 
By playful smiles, (alas ! too oft 
A sad heart's sunshine) by a soft 
And gentle nature, and a free 
Yet modest hand of charity, 
Through life was Owen Lloyd endeared 
To young and old ; and how revered 
Had been that pious spirit, a tide 
Of humble mourners testified, 
When, after pains dispensed to prove 
The measure of God's chastening love, 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

 

•lere, brought from far, his corse found rest,- 
I'ulfilmeiit of his own request ; — 
Irged less for this Yew's shade, though he 
'lanted with such fond hope the tree ; 
,ess for the love of stream and rock, 
'ear as they were, than that his Flock, 
v'hen they no more their Pastor's voice 
ould hear to guide them in their choice 
hrough good and evil, help might have, 
.dmonished, from his silent grave, 
f righteousness, of sins forgiven, 
or peace on earth and bliss in heaven. 

DDRESS TO THE SCHOLARS OF THE 
VILLAGE SCHOOL OF . 
. 
II come, ye little noisy Crew, 
Not long your pastime to prevent ; 
I heard the blessing which to you 
Our common Friend and Father sent. 
I kissed his cheek before he died ; 
And when his breath was fled, 
I raised, while kneeling by his side, 
His hand : — it dropped like lead. 
•Your hands, dear Little-ones, do all 
That can be done, will never fall 
Like his till they are dead, 
i By night or day blow foul or fair, 
Ne'er will the best of all your train 
Play with the locks of his white hair, 
Or stand between his knees again. 
Here did he sit confined for hours ; 
But he could see the woods and plains, 
Could hear the wind and mark the showers 
Come streaming down the streaming panes. 
Now stretched beneath his grass-green mound 
jHe rests a prisoner of the ground. 
He loved the breathing air, 
•He loved the sun, but if it rise 
Or set, to him where now he lies, 
Brings not a moment's care. 
Alas ! what idle words; but take 
The Dirge which for our Master's sake 
iAnd yours, love prompted me to make, 
ilhe rhymes s.o homely in attire 
'With learned ears may ill agree, 
But chanted by your Orphan Quire 
Will make a touching melody. 

DIRGE. 
Mourn, Shepherd, near thy old grey stone ; 
Thou Angler, by the silent flood ; 
And niourn when thou art all alone, 
Thou Woodman, in the distant wood ! 
Thou one blind Sailor, rich in joy 
Though blind, thy tunes in sadness hum ; 
And mourn, thou poor half witted Boy ! 
Born deaf, and living deaf and dumb. 
Thou drooping sick Man, bless the Guide 
Who checked or turned thy headstrong youth, 
As he before had sanctified 
Thy infancy with heavenly truth. 
Ye Striplings, light of heart and gay, 
Bold settlers en some foreign shore, 
Give, when your thoughts are turned this way, 
A sigh to him whom we deplore. 
For us who here in funeral strain 
With one accord our voices raise, 
Let sorrow overcharged with pain 
Be lost in thankfulness and praise. 
And when our hearts shall feel a sting 
From ill we meet or good we miss, 
May touches of his memory bring 
Fond healing, like a mother's kiss. 

BY THE SIDE OF THE GRAVE SOME YEARS 
AFTER. 
Long time his pulse hath ceased to beat ; 
But benefits, his gift, we trace — 
Expressed in every eye we meet 
Round this dear Vale, his native place. 
To stately Hall and Cottage rude 
Flowed from his life what still they hold, 
Light pleasures, every day, renewed ; 
And blessings half a century old. 
Oh true of heart, of spirit gay, 
Thy faults, where not already gone 
From memory, prolong their stay 
For charity's sweet sake alone. 
Such solace find we for our loss ; 
And what beyond this thought we crave 
Comes in the promise from the Cross, 
Shining upon thy happy grave. 

 See upon the subject of the three foregoing pieces the 
Fountain, &c. &c, pages , . 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

ELEGIAC STANZAS, 
SUGGESTED BY A PICTURE OF PEELE CASTLE, IN A STORM, 
PAINTED BY SIR GEORGE BEAUMONT. 
I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged Pile ! 
Four summer weeks I dwelt in sight of thee : 
I saw thee every day ; and all the while 
Thy Form was sleeping on a glassy sea. 
So pure the sky, so quiet was the air ! 
So like, so very like, was day to day ! 
Whene'er I looked, thy Image still was there ; 
It trembled, but it never passed away. 
How perfect was the calm ! it seemed no sleep ; 
No mood, which season takes away, or brings : 
I could have fancied that the mighty Deep 
Was even the gentlest of all gentle Things. 
Ah ! then, if mine had been the Painter's hand, 
To express what then I saw ; and add the gleam, 
The light that never was, on sea or land, 
The consecration, and the Poet's dream ; 
I would have planted thee, thou hoary Pile 
Amid a world how different from this ! 
Beside a sea that could not cease to smile ; 
On tranquil land, beneath a sky of bliss. 
Thou shouldst have seemed a treasure-house divine 
Of peaceful years ; a chronicle of heaven ; — 
Of all the sunbeams that did ever shine 
The very sweetest had to thee been given. 
A Picture had it been of lasting ease, 
Elysian quiet, without toil or strife ; 
No motion but the moving tide, a breeze, 
Or merely silent Nature's breathing life. 
Such, in the fond illusion of my heart, 
Such Picture would I at that time have made : 
And seen the soul of truth in every part, 
A stedfast peace that might not be betrayed. 
So once it would have been, — 'tis so no more ; 
I have submitted to a new control : 
A power is gone, which nothing can restore ; 
A deep distress hath humanised my Soul. 
Not for a moment could I now behold 
A smiling sea, and be what I have been : 
The feeling of my loss will ne'er be old ; 
This, which I know, I speak with mind serene. 

Then, Beaumont, Friend ! who would have been tl 
Friend, 
If he had lived, of Him whom I deplore, 
This work of thine I blame not, but common <i. ; 
This sea in anger, and that dismal shore. 
'tis a passionate Work ! — yet wise and well, 
Well chosen is the spirit that is here ; 
That Hulk which labours in the deadly swell, 
This rueful sky, this pageantry of fear ! 
And this huge Castle, standing here sublim ?, 
 love to see the look with which it braves. 
Cased in the unfeeling armour of old time, 
The lightning, the fierce wind, and trampling wav 
Farewell, farewell the heart that lives alone, 
Housed in a dream, at distance from the Kind ! 
Such happiness, wherever it be known, 
Is to be pitied ; for 'tis surely blind. 
But welcome fortitude, and patient cheer, 
And frequent sights of what is to be borne i 
Such sights, or worse, as are before me hen.— 
Not without hope we suffer and we mourn. 

TO THE DAISY. 

Sweet Flower ! belike one day to have 
A place upon thy Poet's grave, 
I welcome thee once more : 
But He, who was on land, at sea, 
My Brother, too, in loving thee, 
Although he loved more silently, 
Sleeps by his native shore. 
Ah ! hopeful, hopeful was the day 
When to that Ship he bent his way, 
To govern and to guide : 
His wish was gained : a little time 
Would bring him back in manhood's prime 
And free for life, these hills to climb ; 
With all his wants supplied. 
And full of hope day followed day 
While that stout Ship at anchor lay 
Beside the shores of Wight ; 
The May had then made all things green ; 
And, floating there, in pomp serene, 
That Ship was goodly to be seen, 
His pride and his delight ! 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

 

■Yet then, when called ashore, he sought 
[The tender peace of rural thought : 
In more than happy mood 
To your abodes, bright daisy Flowers ! 
He then would steal at leisure hours, 
And loved you glittering in your bowers, 
\k starry multitude. 

ut hark the word ! — the ship is gone ; — 
Eleturns from her long course : — anon 
ets sail : — in season due, 
)nce more on English earth they stand : 
ut, when a third time from the land 
"hey parted, sorrow was at hand 
''or Him and for his crew. 
-fated Vessel ! — ghastly shock ! 
-At length delivered from the rock, 
'he deep she hath regained ; 
aid through the stormy night they steer ; 
labouring for life,- in hope and fear, 
'o reach a safer shore — how near, 
r et not to be attained ! 
Silence ! " the brave Commander cried ; 
o that calm word a shriek replied, 
fc was the last death-shriek. 
A few (my soul oft sees that sight) 
urvive upon the tall mast's height ; 
lut one dear remnant of the night — 
I or Him in vain I seek, 
ix weeks beneath the moving sea 
lie lay in slumber quietly ; 
nforced by wind or wave 
K) quit the Ship for which he died, 
JU claims of duty satisfied ;) 
ind there they found him at her side ; 
nd bore him to the grave. 
ain service ! yet not vainly done 
or this, if other end were none, 
hat He, who had been cast 
|pon a way of life unmeet 
pr such a gentle Soul and sweet, 
;iould find an undisturbed retreat 
ear what he loved, at last — 
flat neighbourhood of grove and field 
b Him a resting-place should yield, 
j meek man and a brave ! 
he birds shall sing and ocean make 
' mournful murmur for Jtis sake ; 
nd Thou, sweet Flower, shalt sleep and wake 
pon his senseless grave. . 

ELEGIAC VERSES, 
IN MEMORY OF MY BROTHER, JOHN WORDSWORTH, 
COMMANDER OP THE E. I. COMPANY'S SHIP THE EARL OP 
ABERGAVENNY, TN WHICH BE TEIUSHED BY CALAMITOUS 
SHIPWRECK, FEB. TH, . 
Composed near the Mountain track, that leads from Gras- 
mere through Grisdale Hawes, where it descends towards 
Patterdale. 
. 

The Sheep-boy whistled loud, and lo ! 
That instant, startled by the shock, 
The Buzzard mounted from the rock 
Deliberate and slow : 
Lord of the air, he took his flight ; 
Oh ! could he on that woeful night 
Have lent his wing, my Brother dear, 
For one poor moment's space to Thee, 
And all who struggled with the Sea, 
When safety was so near. 

Thus in the weakness of my heart 
I spoke (but let that pang be still) 
When rising from the rock at will, 
I saw the Bird depart. 
And let me calmly bless the Power 
That meets me in this unknown Flower, 
Affecting type of him I mourn ! 
With calmness suffer and believe, 
And grieve, and know that I must grieve, 
Not cheerless, though forlorn. 

Here did we stop ; and here looked round 
While each into himself descends, 
For that last thought of parting Friends 
That is not to be found. 
Hidden was Grasmere Vale from sight, 
Our home and his, his heart's delight, 
His quiet heart's selected home. 
But time before him melts away, 
And he hath feeling of a day 
Of blessedness to come. 

Full soon in sorrow did I weep, 
Taught that the mutual hope was dust, 
In sorrow, but for higher trust, 
How miserably deep ! 
All vanished in a single word, 
A breath, a sound, and scarcely heard. 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

S ea — Ship— drowned — Shipwreck — so it came, 
The meek, the brave, the good, was gone ; 
He who had been our living John 
Was nothing but a name. 
V. 
That was indeed a parting ! oh, 
Glad am I, glad that it is past ; 
For there were some on whom it cast 
Unutterable woe. 
But they as well as I have gains ; — 
From many a humble source, to pains 
Like these, there comes a mild release ; 
Even here I feel it, even this Plant 
Is in its beauty ministrant 
To comfort and to peace. 
VI. 
He would have loved thy modest grace, 
Meek Flower ! To Him I would have said, 
" It grows upon its native bed 
Beside our Parting-place ; 
There, cleaving to the ground, it lies 
With multitude of purple eyes, 
Spangling a cushion green like moss ; 
But we will see it, joyful tide ! 
Some day, to see it in its pride, 
The mountain will we cross." 

— Brother and friend, if verse of mine 
Have power to make thy virtues known, 
Here let a monumental Stone 
Stand — sacred as a Shrine ; 
And to the few who pass this way, 
Traveller or Shepherd, let it say, 
Long as these mighty rocks endure, — 
Oh do not Thou too fondly brood, 
Although deserving of all good, 
On any earthly hope, however pure ! 

IX. 

LINES 

Composed at Grasmere, during a walk one Evening, after a 
stormy day, the Author having just read in a Newspaper 
that the dissolution of Mr. Fox was hourly expected. 
Loud is the Vale ! the Voice is up 
With which she speaks when storms are gone, 
A mighty unison of streams ! 
Of all her Voices, One ! 

Loud is the Vale ; — this inland Depth 
In peace is roaring like the Sea ; 
Yon star upon the mountain-top 
Is listening quietly. 
Sad was I, even to pain deprest, 
Importunate and heavy load ! 
The Comforter hath found me here, 
Upon this lonely road ; 
And many thousands now are sad — 
Wait the fulfilment of then.' fear ; 
For he must die who is their stay, 
Their glory disappear. 
A Power is passing from the earth 
To breathless Nature's dark abyss ; 
But when the great and good depart 
What is it more than tin's — 
That Man, who is from God sent forth, 
Doth yet again to God return ? — 
Such ebb and flow must ever be, 
Then wherefore should we mourn  

 The plant alluded to is the Moss Campion (Silene 
| acaulis, of Linnaeus). See note at the end of the volume. 
See among the Poems on the " Naming of places," No vi. 

INVOCATION TO THE EARTH. 
FEBRUARY, . 
" Rest, rest, perturbed Earth ! 
rest, thou doleful Mother of Mankind r ' 
A Spirit sang in tones more plaintive tbau the w u 
" From regions where no evil thing has birth 
I come — thy stains to wash away, 
Thy cherished fetters to unbind, 
And open thy sad eyes upon a milder day. 
The Heavens are thronged with martyrs that bav' 
risen 
From out thy noisome prison ; 
The penal caverns groan 
With tens of thousands rent from off the tPBi 
Of hopeful life, — by battle's whirlwind blown 
Into the deserts of Eternity. 
Unpitied havoc ! Victims unlamented ! 
But not on high, where madness is resented, 
And murder causes some sad tears to flow, 
Though, from the widely-sweeping blow, 
The choirs of Angels spread, triumphant!; 
augmented. 

 Importuna e grave salma. 
Michael Angeio. 

- 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

 

" False Parent of Mankind ! 
Obdurate, proud, and blind, 
Sprinkle thee with soft celestial dews, 
|y lost, maternal heart to re-infuse ! 
jittering this far-fetched moisture from my wings, 
Ton the act a blessing I implore, 
(which the rivers in their secret springs,' 
'. e rivers stained so oft with human gore, 
m conscious ; — may the like return no more ! 
l,y Discord — for a Seraph's care 
j'dl be attended with a bolder prayer — 
ly she, who once disturbed the seats of bliss 
These mortal spheres above, 
I chained for ever to the black abyss ! 
i d thou, rescued Earth, by peace and love, 
/d merciful desires, thy sanctity approve ! " 
The Spirit ended his mysterious rite, 
/ d the pure vision closed in darkness infinite. 

LINES 
H'TTEN ON A BLANK LEAF IN A COPY OF THE AUTHOR'S 
iOEM " THE EXCURSION," UPON HEARING OF THE DEATH 
F THE LATE VICAR OF KENDAL, 
i public notice, with reluctance strong, 
I I deliver this unfinished Song ; 
\ for one happy issue ; — and I look 
Vfch self-congratulation on the Book 
I ich pious, learned, Murfitt saw and read ; — 
L>n my thoughts his saintly Spirit fed ; 
I,onned the new-born Lay with grateful heart — 
Feboding not how soon he must depart ; 
I veeting that to him the joy was given 
V:ich good men take with them from earth to 
heaven. 

ELEGIAC STANZAS. 
(A.RESSED TO SIR G. H. B. UPON THE DEATH 
SISTER-IN-LAW.) 

for a dirge ! But why complain ? 
sk rather a triumphal strain 
hen Fermor's race is run ; 
garland of immortal boughs 
) twine around the Christian's brows, 
hose glorious work is done. 



We pay a high and holy debt ; 
No tears of passionate regret 
Shall stain this votive lay ; 
Ill-worthy, Beaumont ! were the grief 
That flings itself on wild relief 
When Saints have passed away. 
Sad doom, at Sorrow's shrine to kneel, 
For ever covetous to feel, 
And impotent to bear ! 
Such once was hers — to think and think 
On severed love, and only sink 
From anguish to despair ! 
But nature to its inmost part 
Faith had refined ; and to her heart 
A peaceful cradle given : 
Calm as the dew-drop's, free to rest 
Within a breeze-fanned rose's breast 
Till it exhales to Heaven. 
Was ever Spirit that could bend 
So graciously ? — that could descend, 
Another's need to suit, 
So promptly from her lofty throne ? — 
In works of love, in these alone, 
How restless, how minute ! 
Pale was her hue ; yet mortal cheek 
Ne'er kindled with a livelier streak 
When aught had suffered wrong, — 
When aught that breathes had felt a wound ; 
Such look the Oppressor might confound, 
However proud and strong. 
But hushed be every thought that springs 
From out the bitterness of things ; 
Her quiet is secure ; 
No thorns can pierce her tender feet, 
Whose life was, like the violet, sweet, 
As climbing jasmine, pure — 
As snowdrop on an infant's grave, 
Or lily heaving with the wave 
That feeds it and defends; 
As Vesper, ere the star hath kissed 
The mountain top, or breathed the mist 
That from the vale ascends. 
Thou takest not away, Death ! 
Thou strikest — absence perisheth, 
Indifference is no more ; 
The future brightens on our sight ; 
For on the past hath fallen a fight 
That tempts us to adore. 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

ELEGIAC MUSINGS 
IN THE GROUNDS OF COLEORTON HALL, THE SEAT OP THE 
LATE SIR G. H. BEAUMONT, BART. 
In these grounds stands the Parish Church, wherein is a 
mural monument hearing an Inscription which , in defer- 
ence to the earnest request of the deceased, is confined 
to name, dates, and these words :— ■' Enter not into judg- 
ment with thy servant, O Lord ! ' 
With copious eulogy in prose or rhyme 
Graven on the tomb we struggle against Time, 
Alas, how feebly ! but our feelings rise 
And still we struggle when a good man dies : 
Such offering Beaumont dreaded and forbade, 
A spirit meek in self-abasement clad. 
Yet here at least, though few have numbered days 
That shunned so modestly the light of praise, 
His graceful manners, and the temperate ray 
Of that arch fancy which would round him play, 
Brightening a converse never known to swerve 
From courtesy and delicate reserve ; 
That sense, the bland philosophy of life, 
Which checked discussion ere it warmed to strife ; 
Those rare accomplishments, and varied powers, 
Might have their record among sylvan bowers. 
Oh, fled for ever ! vanished like a blast 
That shook the leaves in myriads as it passed ; — 
Gone from this world of earth, ah, sea, and sky. 
From all its spirit-moving imagery, 
Intensely studied with a painter's eye, 
A poet's heart ; and, for congenial view, 
Portrayed with happiest pencil, not untrue 
To common recognitions while the line 
Flowed in a course of sympathy divine ; — 
Oh ! severed, too abruptly, from delights 
That all the seasons shared with equal rights ; — 
Rapt in the grace of undismantled age, 
From soul-felt music, and the treasured page 
Lit by that evening lamp which loved to shed 
Its mellow lustre round thy honoured head ; 
While Friends beheld thee give with eye, voice, 
mien. 
, More than theatric force to Shakspeare's scene ; — 
If thou hast heard me — if thy Spirit know 
Aught of these bowers and whence then pleasures 
flow ; 
If things in our remembrance held so dear, 
And thoughts and projects fondly cherished here, 
To thy exalted nature only seem 
Time's vanities, light fragments of earth's dream — 
Rebuke us not ! — The mandate is obeyed 
That said, " Let praise be mute where I am laid ; " 

The holier deprecation, given in trust 
To the cold marble, waits upon thy dust ; 
Yet have we found how slowly genuine grief 
From silent admiration wins relief. 
Too long abashed thy Name is like a rose 
That doth ' within itself its sweetness close ; ' 
A drooping daisy changed into a cup 
In which her bright-eyed beauty is shut up. 
Within these groves, where still are flitting by 
Shades of the Past, oft noticed with a sigh, 
Shall stand a votive Tablet, haply free, 
When towers and temples fall, to speak of Thee ! 
If sculptured emblems of our mortal doom 
Recal not there the wisdom of the Tomb, 
Green ivy risen from out the cheerful earth, 
Will fringe the lettered stone ; and herbs spring 
forth, 
Whose fragrance, by soft dews and rain unbound, 
Shall penetrate the heart without a wound ; 
While truth and love their purposes fulfil, 
Commemorating genius, talent, skill, 
That could not lie concealed where Thou wert 
known ; 
Thy virtues He must judge, and He alone, 
The God upon whose mercy they are thrown. 
Nov. . 

WRITTEN AFTER THE DEATH OF 
CHARLES LAMB. 
To a good Man of most dear memory 
This Stone is sacred. Here he lies apart 
From the great city where he first drew breath, 
Was reared and taught ; and humbly earned his 

To the strict labours of the merchant's desk 
By duty chained. Not seldom did those tasks 
Tease, and the thought of time so spent depress, 
His spirit, but the recompence was high ; 
Firm Independence, Bounty's rightful sire ; 
Affections, warm as sunshine, free as air ; 
A.nd when the precious hours of leisure came, 
Knowledge and wisdom, gained from converse sweet 
With books, or while he ranged the crowded streets 
With a keen eye, and overflowing heart : 
So genius triumphed over seeming wrong, 
And poured out truth in works by thoughtful love 
Inspired — works potent over smiles and tears. 
And as round mountain-tops the lightning plays, 
Thus innocently sported, breaking forth 
As from a cloud of seme grave sympathy, 
Humour and wild instinctive wit, and all 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

 

, The vivid flashes of his spoken words. 
From the most gentle creature nursed in fields 
Had been derived the name he bore — a name, 
Wherever christian altars have been raised, 
Hallowed to meekness and to innocence ; 
And if in him meekness at times gave way, 
Provoked out of herself by troubles strange, 
Many and strange, that hung about his life ; 
Still, at the centre of his being, lodged 
A soul by resignation sanctified : 
And if too often, self-reproached, he felt 
That innocence belongs not to our kind, 
A power that never ceased to abide in him, 
Charity, 'mid the multitude of sins 
That she can cover, left not his exposed 
To an unforgiving judgment from just Heaven. 
, he was good, if e'er a good Man lived ! 
From a reflecting mind and sorrowing heart 
Those simple lines flowed with an earnest wish, 
Though but a doubting hope, that they might serve 
Fitly to guard the precious dust of him 
Whose virtues called them forth. That aim is 
missed ; 
For much that truth most urgently required 
Had from a faltering pen been asked in vain : 
Yet, haply, on the printed page received, 
The imperfect record, there, may stand unblamed 
As long as verse of mine shall breathe the air 
Of memory, or see the light of love. 
Thou wert a scorner of the fields, my Friend, 
But more in show than truth ; and from the fields, 
And from the mountains, to thy rural grave 
Transported, my soothed spirit hovers o'er 
Its green untrodden turf, and blowing flowers ; 
And taldng up a voice shall speak (tho' still 
Awed by the theme's peculiar sanctity 
Which words less free presumed not even to touch) 
Of that fraternal love, whose heaven-lit lamp 
From infancy, through manhood, to the last 
Of threescore years, and to thy latest hour, 
Burnt on with ever-strengthening light, enshrined 
Within thy bosom. 
' Wonderful ' hath been 
The love established between man and man, 
' Passing the love of women ;' and between 
Man and his help-mate in fast wedlock joined 
Through God, is raised a spirit and soul of love 
Without whose blissful influence Paradise 
Had been no Paradise ; and earth were now 
A waste where creatures bearing human form, 
Direst of savage beasts, would roam in fear, 
Joyless and comfortless. Our days glide on ; 

And let him grieve who cannot choose but grieve 
That he hath been an Elm without his Vine, 
And her bright dower of clustering charities, 
That, roundhis trunk andbranches,mighthave clung 
Enriching and adorning. Unto thee, 
Not so enriched, not so adorned, to thee 
Was given (say rather thou of later birth 
Wert given to her) a Sister — 'tis a word 
Timidly uttered, for she lives, the meek, 
The self-restraining, and the ever-kind ; 
In whom thy reason and intelligent heart 
Found — for all interests, hopes, and tender caies, 
All softening, humanising, hallowing powers, 
Whether withheld, or for her sake unsought — 
More than sufficient recompence ! 
Her love 
(What weakness prompts the voice to tell it here?) 
Was as the love of mothers ; and when years, 
Lifting the boy to man's estate, had called 
The long-protected to assume the part 
Of a protector, the first filial tie 
Was undissolved ; and, in or out of sight, 
Remained imperishably interwoven 
With life itself. Thus, 'mid a shifting world, 
Did they together testify of time 
And season's difference — a double tree 
With two collateral stems sprung from one root ; 
Such were they— such thro' life they might have been 
In union, in partition only such ; 
Otherwise wrought the will of the Most High ; 
Yet, thro' all visitations and all trials, 
Still they were faithful ; like two vessels launched 
From the same beach one ocean to explore 
With mutual help, and sailing — to their league 
True, as inexorable winds, or bars 
Floating or fixed of polar ice, allow. 
But turn we rather, let my spirit turn 
With thine, silent and invisible Friend ! 
To those dear intervals, nor rare nor brief, 
When reunited, and by choice withdrawn 
From miscellaneous converse, ye were taught 
That the remembrance of foregone distress, 
And the worse fear of future ill (which oft 
Doth hang around it, as a sickly child 
Upon its mother) may be both alike 
Disarmed of power to unsettle present good 
So prized, and things inward and outward held 
In such an even balance, that the heart 
Acknowledges God's grace, his mercy feels, 
And in its depth of gratitude is still. 
O gift divine of quiet sequestration ! 
The hermit, exercised in prayer and praise, 

 

EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES. 

And feeding daily on the hope of heaven, 
Is happy in his vow, and fondly cleaves 
To life-long singleness ; hut happier far 
Was to your souls, and, to the thoughts of others, 
A thousand times more beautiful appeared, 
Your dual loneliness. The sacred tie 
Is broken ; yet why grieve ? for Time but holds 
His moiety in trust, till Joy shall lead 
To the blest world where parting is unknown. 
l«. 

EXTEMPORE EFFUSION UPON THE DEATH 
OF JAMES HOGG. 
When first, descending from the moorlands, 
I saw the Stream of Yarrow glide 
Along a bare and open valley, , 
The Ettrick Shepherd was my guide. 
When last along its banks I wandered, 
Through groves that had begun to shed 
Their golden leaves upon the pathways, 
My steps the Border-minstrel led. 
The mighty Minstrel breathes no longer, 
Mid mouldering ruins low he lies ; 
And death upon the braes of Yarrow, 
Has closed the Shepherd-poet's eyes : 
Nor has the rolling year twice measured, 
From sign to sign, its stedfast course, 
Since every mortal power of Coleridge 
Was frozen at its marvellous source ; 
The rapt One, of the godlike forehead, 
The heaven-eyed creature sleeps in earth : 
And Lamb, the frolic and the gentle, 
Has vanished from his lonely hearth. 
Like clouds that rake the mountain-summits, 
Or waves that own no curbing hand, 
How fast has brother followed brother, 
From sunshine to the sunless land ! 
Yet I, whose lids from infant slumber 
Were earlier raised, remain to hear 
A timid voice, that asks in whispers, 
" Who next will drop and disappear ? " 

Our haughty life is crowned with darkness, 
Like London with its own black wreath, 
On which with thee, Crabbe ! forth-looking, 
I gazed from Hampstead's breezy heath. 
As if but yesterday departed, 
Thou too art gone before ; but why, 
O'er ripe fruit, seasonably gathered, 
Should frail survivors heave a sigh ? 
Mourn rather for that holy Spirit, 
Sweet as the spring, as ocean deep ; 
For Her who, ere her summer faded, 
Has sunk into a breathless sleep. 
No more of old romantic sorrows, 
For slaughtered Youth or love-lorn Maid ! 
With sharper grief is Yarrow smitten, 
And Ettrick mourns with her then- Poet dead. 
Nov. . 

INSCRIPTION 

FOB, A MONUMENT IN CROSTHWAITE CHDECH, IN TEE 
VALE OF KESWICK. 
Ye vales and hills whose beauty hither drew 
The poet's steps, and fixed him here, on you, 
His eyes have closed ! And ye, lov'd books, no 
more 
Shall Southey feed upon your precious lore, 
To works that ne'er shall forfeit their renown, 
Adding immortal labours of his own — 
Whether he traced historic truth, with zeal 
For the State's guidance, or the Church's weal, 
Or Fancy, disciplined by studious art, 
Inform'd his pen, or wisdom of the heart, 
Or judgments sanctioned in the Patriot's mind 
By reverence for the rights of all mankind. 
Wide were his aims, yet in no human breast 
Could private feelings meet for holier rest. 
His joys, his griefs, have vanished like a cloud 
From Skiddaw's top ; but he to heaven was vowed 
Through his industrious life, and Christian faith 
Calmed in his soul the fear of change and death. 

ODE. 

 

ODE. 
INTIMATIONS OF IMMORTALITY FROM RECOLLECTIONS OF EARLY CHILDHOOD. 

The Child is Father of the Man ; 
And I could wish my days to he 
Bound each to each by natural piety. 
See page . 

i There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, 
The earth, and every common sight, 
To me did seem 
Apparelled in celestial light, 
The glory and the freshness of a dream. 
It is not now as it hath been of yore ; — ■ 
Turn whereso'er I may, 
By night or day, 
The things which I have seen I now can see no more. 
ir. 
The Rainbow comes and goes, 
And lovely is the Rose, 
The Moon doth with delight 
, Look round her when the heavens are bare, 
Waters on a starry night 
Are beautiful and fair ; 
The sunshine is a glorious birth ; 
But yet I know, where'er I go, 
[That there hath past away a glory from the earth. 
in. 
;Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, 
And while the young lambs bound 
As to the tabor's sound, 
To me alone there came a thought of grief: 
A timely utterance gave that thought relief, 
And I again am strong : 
The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep ; 
No more shall grief of mine the season wrong ; 
I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng, 
■pie Winds come to me from the fields of sleep, 
And all the earth is gay ; 
Land and sea 
Give themselves up to jollity, 
And with the heart of May 
Doth every Beast keep holiday ; — 
Thou Child of Joy, 
'ohout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy 
Shepherd-boy ! 

Ye blessed Creatures, I have heard the call 
Ye to each other make ; I see 
The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; 
My heart is at your festival, 
My head hath its coronal, 
The fulness of your bliss, I feel — I feel it all. 
Oh evil day ! if I were sullen 
While Earth herself is adorning, 
This sweet May-morning, 
And the Children are culling 
On every side, 
In a thousand valleys far and wide, 
Fresh flowers ; while the sun shines warm, 
And the Babe leaps up on his Mother's arm : — 
I hear, I hear, with joy I hear ! 
— But there 's a Tree, of many, one, 
A single Field which I have looked upon, 
Both of them speak of something that is gone : 
The Pansy at my feet 
Doth the same tale repeat : 
Whither is fled the visionary gleam ? 
Where is it now, the glory and the dream % 

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting : 
The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, 
Hath had elsewhere its setting, 
And cometh from afar : 
Not in entire forgetfulness, 
And not in utter nakedness, 
But trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God, who is our home : 
Heaven lies about us in our infancy ! 
Shades of the prison-house begin to close 
Upon the growing Boy, 
But He beholds the light, and whence it flows, 
He sees it in his joy ; 
The Youth, who daily farther from the east 
Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, 

 

ODE. 

And by the vision splendid 
Is on his way attended ; 
At length the Man perceives it die away, 
And fade into the light of common day. 

Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own ; 
Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, 
And, even with something of a Mother's mind, 
And no unworthy aim, 
The homely Nurse doth all she can 
To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man, 
Forget the glories he hath known, 
And that imperial palace whence he came. 

Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, 
A six years' Darling of a pigmy size ! 
See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, 
Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, 
With light upon him from his father's eyes ! 
See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, 
Some fragment from his dream of human life, 
Shaped by himself with newly-learned art ; 
A wedding or a festival, 
A mourning or a funeral ; 
And this hath now his heart, 
And unto this he frames his song : 
Then will he fit his tongue 
To dialogues of business, love, or strife ; 
But it will not be long 
Ere this be thrown aside, 
And with new joy and pride 
The little Actor cons another part ; 
Filling from time to time his ' humorous stage ' 
With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, 
That Life brings with her in her equipage ; 
As if his whole vocation 
Were endless imitation. 

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie 
Thy Soul's immensity ; 
Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep 
Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind, 
That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, 
Haunted for ever by the eternal mind, — 
Mighty Prophet ! Seer blest ! 
On whom those truths do rest, 
Which we are toiling all our lives to find, 
In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave ; 
Thou, over whom thy Immortality 

Broods like the Day, a Master o'er a Slave, 
A Presence which is not to be put by ; 
Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might 
Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, 
Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke 
The years to bring the inevitable yoke, 
Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife ? 
Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight, 
And custom lie upon thee with a weight, 
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life ! 

O joy ! that in our embers 
Is something that doth live, 
That nature yet remembers 
What was so fugitive ! 
The thought of our past years in me doth breed 
Perpetual benediction : not indeed 
For that which is most worthy to be blest ; 
Delight and liberty, the simple creed 
Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest, 
With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his 
breast : — 
Not for these I raise 
The song of thanks and praise ; 
But for those obstinate questionings 
Of sense and outward things, 
Fallings from us, vanishings ; 
Blank misgivings of a Creature 
Moving about in worlds not realised, 
High instincts before which our mortal Nature 
Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised : 
But for those first affections, 
Those shadowy recollections, 
Which, be they what they may, 
Are yet the fountain light of all our day, 
Are yet a master light of all our seeing ; 
Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make 
Our noisy years seem moments in the being 
Of the eternal Silence : truths that wake, 
To perish never ; 
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour, 
Nor Man nor Boy, 
Nor all that is at enmity with joy, 
Can utterly abolish or destroy ! 
Hence in a season of calm weather 
Though inland far we be, 
Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea 
Which brought us hither, 
Can in a moment travel thither, 
And see the Children sport upon the shore, 
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore. 



ODE. 

 

Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song ! 
And let the young Lambs bound 
As to the tabor's sound ! 
We in thought will join your throng, 
Ye that pipe and ye that play, 
Ye that through your hearts to-day 
Feel the gladness of the May ! 
What though the radiance which was once so bright 
:Be now for ever taken from my sight, 
Though nothing can bring back the hour 
Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower ; 
We will grieve not, rather find 
Strength in what remains behind ; 
In the primal sympathy 
Which having been must ever be ; 
In the soothing thoughts that spring 
Out of human suffering ; 
In the faith that looks through death, 
n years that bring the philosophic mind. 

And , ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves, 
Forebode not any severing of our loves ! 
Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might ; 
I only have relinquished one delight 
To live beneath your more habitual sway. 
I love the Brooks which down their channels fret, 
Even more than when I tripped lightly as they ; 
The innocent brightness of a new-born Day 
Is lovely yet ; 
The Clouds that gather round the setting sun 
Do take a sober colouring from an eye 
That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality ; 
Another race hath been, and other palms are won. 
Thanks to the human heart by which we live, 
Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, 
To me the meanest flower that blows can give 
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears. 
—. 

 



 

THE PRELUDE. 

THE PRELUDE, 
OR GEOWTH OF A POET'S MIND; 
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL POEM. 
ADVERTISEMENT. 

The following Poem was commenced in the 
beginning of the year , and completed in 
the summer of . 
The design and occasion of the work are de- 
scribed by the Author in his Preface to the 
Excursion, first published in , where he 
thus speaks : — 
"Several years ago, when the Author retired to his 
native mountains with the hope of being enabled to 
construct a literary work that might live, it was a rea- 
sonable thing that he should take a review of his own 
mind, and examine how far Nature and Education had 
qualified him for such an employment. 
"As subsidiary to this preparation, he undertook to 
record, in verse, the origin and progress of his own 
powers, as far as he was acquainted with them. 
"That work, addressed to a dear friend, most distin- 
guished for his knowledge and genius, and to whom the 
Author' intellect is deeply indebted, has been long 
finished ; and the result of the investigation which gave 
rise to it, was a determination to compose a philosophical 
Poem, containing views of Man, Nature, and Society, 
and to be entitled the ' Recluse ; ' as having for its 
principal subject the sensations and opinions of a poet 
living in retirement. 
"The preparatory poem is biographical, and conducts 
the history of the Author's mind to the point when he 
was emboldened to hope that his faculties were suffici- 
ently matured for entering upon the arduous labour 
which he had proposed to himself ; and the two works 
have the same kind of relation to each other, if he may 
so express himself, as the Ante-chapel has to the body 
of a Gothic church. Continuing this allusion, he may 
be permitted to add, that his minor pieces, which have 
been long before the public, when they shall be properly 
arranged, will be found by the attentive reader to have 
such connection with the main work as may give them 

claim to be likened to the little cells, oratories, and 
sepulchral recesses, ordinarily included in those edifices." 
Such was the Author's language in tlie year 
. 
It will thence be seen, that the present Poem 
was intended to be introductory to the Recluse, 
and that the Recluse, if completed, would have 
consisted of Three Parts. Of these, the Second; 
Part alone, viz., the Excursion, was finished, and 
given to the world by the Author. 
The First Eook of the First Part of th 
Recluse still remains in manuscript; but th 
Third Part was only planned. The materials o: 
which it would have been formed have, however,: 
been incorporated, for the most part, in the 
Author's other Publications, written subsequently 
to the Excursion. 
The Friend, to whom the present Poem is ad- 
dressed, was the late Samuel Taylor Coler t D';k. 
who was resident in Malta, for the restoration ol 
his health, when the greater part of it was com 
posed. 
Mr. Coleridge read a considerable portion o: 
the Poem while he was abroad ; and his feelings  
on hearing it recited by the Author (after his 
return to his own country), are recorded in his 
Verses, addressed to Mr. Wordsworth, which wil 
be found in the, "Sibylline Leaves," p. , ed 
, or " Poetical Works, by S. T. Coleridge, 
vol. i., p. .— Ed. 
Rtdal Mount, 
My IZth, . 

INTRODUCTION. 

! 

BOOK FIRST. 

INTRODUCTION.— CHILDHOOD AND 
SCHOOL-TIME. 
THEEE is blessing in this gentle breeze, 
A visitant that while it fans my cheek 
Doth seem half-conscious of the joy it brings 
From the green fields, and from yon azure sky. 
Whate'er its mission, the soft breeze can come 
To none more grateful than to me ; escaped 
From the vast city, where I long had pined 
A discontented sojourner : now free, 
Free as a bird to settle where I will. 
What dwelling shall receive me  in what vale 
Shall be my harbour ] underneath what grove 
Shall I take up my home ] and what clear stream 
Shall with its murmur lull me into rest ? 
The earth is all before me. With a heart 
Joyous, nor scared at its own liberty, 
 look about ; and should the chosen guide 
Be nothing better than a wandering cloud, 
I cannot miss my way. I breathe again ! 
Trances of thought and mountings of the mind 
Come fast upon me : it is shaken off, 
That burthen of my own unnatural self, 
The heavy weight of many a weary day 
: Not mine, and such as were not made for me. 
LoDg months of peace (if such bold word accord 
■ With any promises of human life), 
Long months of ease and undisturbed delight 
Are mine in prospect ; whither shall I turn, 
By road or pathway, or through trackless field, 
' Up hill or down, or shall some floating thing 
Upon the river point me out my course  
Dear Liberty ! Yet what would it avail 
, But for a gift that consecrates the joy  
■ For I, methought, while the sweet breath of 
heaven 
Was blowing on my body, felt within 
i A correspondent breeze, that gently moved 
With quickening virtue, but is now become 
i A tempest, a redundant energy, 
| Vexing its own creation. Thanks to both, 
I And their congenial powers, that, while they join 
 In breaking up a long-continued frost, 
j Bring with them vernal promises, the hope 
Of active days urged on by flying hours, — 

Days of sweet leisure, taxed with patient thought 
Abstruse, nor wanting punctual service high, 
Matins and vespers of harmonious verse ! 
Thus fai', Friend ! did I, not used to make 
A present joy the matter of a song, 
Pour forth that day my soul in measured strains 
That would not be forgotten, and are here 
Recorded : to the open fields I told 
A prophecy : poetic numbers came 
Spontaneously to clothe in priestly robe 
A renovated spirit singled out, 
Such hope was mine, for holy services. 
My own voice cheered me, and, far more, the 
mind's 
Internal echo of the imperfect sound; 
To both I listened, drawing from them both 
A cheerful confidence in things to come. 
Content and not unwilling now to give 
A respite to this passion, I paced on 
W T ith brisk and eager steps ; and came, at length, 
To a green shady place, where down I sate 
Beneath a tree, slackening my thoughts by choice, 
And settling into gentler happiness. 
'Twas autumn, and a clear and placid day, 
With warmth, as much as needed, from a sun 
Two hours declined towards the west ; a day 
i With silver clouds, and sunshine on the grass, 
And in the sheltered and the sheltering grove 
A perfect stillness. Many were the thoughts 
Encouraged and dismissed, till choice was made 
Of a known Vale, whither my feet should turn, 
Nor rest till they had reached the very door 
Of the one cottage which methought I saw. 
No picture of mere memory ever looked 
So fair ; and while upon the fancied scene 
I gazed with growing love, a higher power 
Than Fancy gave assurance of some work 
Of glory there forthwith to be begun, 
Perhaps too there performed. Thus long I mused, 
Nor e'er lost sight of what I mused upon, 
Save when, amid the stately grove of oaks, 
Now here, now there, an acorn, from its cup 
Dislodged, through sere leaves rustled, or at once 
To the bare earth dropped with a startling sound. 
From that soft couch I rose not, till the sun 
Had almost touched the horizon ; casting then 

 

THE PEELUDE. 

A backward glance upon the curling cloud 
Of city smoke, by distance ruralised ; 
Keen as a Truant or a Fugitive, 
But as a Pilgrim resolute, I took, 
Even with the chance equipment of that hour, 
The road that pointed toward the chosen Vale. 
It was a splendid evening, and my soul 
Once more made trial of her strength, nor lacked 
iEolian visitations ; but the harp 
Was soon defrauded, and the banded host 
Of harmony dispersed in straggling sounds, 
And lastly utter silence ! "Be it so ; 
Why think of anything but present good ] " 
So, like a home-bound labourer I pursued 
My way beneath the mellowing sun, that shed 
Mild influence ; nor left in me one wish 
Again to bend the Sabbath of that time 
To a servile yoke. What need of many words ? 
A pleasant loitering journey, through three days 
Continued, brought me to my hermitage. 
I spare to tell of what ensued, the life 
In common things — the endless store of things, 
Rare, or at least so seeming, every day 
Found all about me in one neighbourhood — 
The self-congratulation, and, from morn 
To night, unbroken cheerfulness serene. 
But speedily an earnest longing rose 
To brace myself to some determined aim, 
Reading or thinking ; either to lay up 
New stores, or rescue from decay the old 
By timely interference : and therewith 
Came hopes still higher, that with outward life 
I might endue some airy phantasies 
That had been floating loose about for years, 
And to such beings temperately deal forth 
The many feelings that oppressed my heart. 
That hope hath been discouraged ; welcome light 
Dawns from the east, but dawns to disappear 
And mock me with a sky that ripens not 
Into a steady morning : if my mind, 
Remembering the bold promise of the past, 
Would gladly grapple with some noble theme, 
Vain is her wish ; where'er she turns she finds 
Impediments from day to day renewed. 
And now it would content me to yield up 
Those lofty hopes awhile, for present gifts 
Of humbler industry. But, oh, dear Friend ! 
The Poet, gentle creature as he is, 
Hath, like the Lover, his unruly times ; 
His fits when he is neither sick nor well, 
Though no distress be near him but his own 
Unmanageable thoughts : his mind, best pleased 
While she as duteous as the mother dove 

Sits brooding, lives not always to that end, 
But like the innocent bird, hath goadings on 
That drive her as in trouble through the groves ■ 
With me is now such passion, to be blamed 
No otherwise than as it lasts too long. 
When, as becomes a man who would prepare 
For such an arduous work, I through myself 
Make rigorous inquisition, the report 
Is often cheering ; for I neither seem 
To lack that first great gift, the vital soul, 
Nor general Truths, which are themselves a sort 
Of Elements and Agents, Under-powers, 
Subordinate helpers of the living mind : 
Nor am I naked of external things, 
Forms, images, nor numerous other aids 
Of less regard, though won perhaps with toil 
And needful to build up a Poet's praise. 
Time, place, and manners do I seek, and these 
Are found in plenteous store, but nowhere such 
As may be singled out with steady choice ; 
No little band of yet remembered names 
Whom I, in perfect confidence, might hope 
To summon back from lonesome banishment, 
And make them dwellers in the hearts of men 
Now living, or to live in future years. 
Sometimes the ambitious Power of choice, mis- 
taking 
Proud spring-tide swellings for a regular sea, 
Will settle on some British theme, some old 
Romantic tale by Milton left unsung ; 
More often turning to some gentle place 
Within the groves of Chivalry, I pipe 
To shepherd swains, or seated harp in hand, 
Amid reposing knights by a river side 
Or fountain, listen to the grave reports 
Of dire enchantments faced and overcome 
By the strong mind, and tales of warlike feats, 
Where spear encountered spear, and sword with 
sword 
Fought, as if conscious of the blazonry 
That the shield bore, so glorious was the strife ; 
Whence inspiration for a song that winds 
Through ever changing scenes of votive quest 
Wrongs to redress, harmonious tribute paid 
To patient courage and unblemished truth, 
To firm devotion, zeal unquenchable, 
And Christian meekness hallowing faithful ioves. 
Sometimes, more sternly moved, I would rebte 
How vanquished Mithridates northward passed, 
And, hidden in the cloud of years, became 
Odin, the Father of a race by whom 
Perished the Roman Empire : how the friends 
And followers of Sertorius, out of Spain 



CHILDHOOD AND SCHOOL-TIME. 

 

Flying, found shelter in the Fortunate Isles, 
And left their usages, their arts and laws, 
To disappear by a slow gradual death, 
To dwindle and to perish one by one, 
Starved in those narrow bounds : but not the soul 
Of Liberty, which fifteen hundred years 
Survived, and, when the European came 
With skill and power that might not be withstood, 
Did, lite a pestilence, maintain its hold 
And wasted down by glorious death that race 
Of natural heroes : or I would record 
How, in tyrannic times, some high-souled man, 
Unnamed among the chronicles of kings, 
Suffered in silence for Truth's sake : or tell, 
How that one Frenchman, through continued 
force 
Of meditation on the inhuman deeds 
Of those who conquered first the Indian Isles, 
Went single in his ministry across 
The Ocean ; not to comfort the oppressed, 
But, like a thirsty wind, to roam about 
Withering the Oppressor : how Gustavus sought 
jHelp at his need in Dalecarlia's mines : 
How Wallace fought for Scotland ; left the name 
Of Wallace to be found, like a wild flower, • 
All over his dear Country ; left the deeds 
|f Wallace, like a family of Ghosts, 
To people the steep rocks and river banks, ' 
Her natural sanctuaries, with a local soul 
Of independence and stern liberty. 
Sometimes it suits me better to invent 
A. tale from my own heart, more near akin 
To my own passions and habitual.thoughts ; 
Some variegated story, in the main 
Lofty, but the unsubstantial structure melts 
Before the very sun that brightens it, 
Mist into air dissolving ! Then a wish, 
My last and favourite aspiration, mounts 
With yearning toward some philosophic song 
'Of Truth that cherishes our daily life; 
With meditations passionate from deep 
Recesses in man's heart, immortal verse 
Thoughtfully fitted to the Orphean lyre ; 
But from this awful burthen I full soon 
Take refuge and beguile myself with trust 
That mellower years will bring a riper mind 
And clearer insight. Thus my days are past 
m contradiction ; with no skill to part 
.^ague longing, haply bred by want of power, 
l ? rom paramount impulse not to be withstood, 

! Dominique de Gourgues, a French gentleman who 
vent in  to Florida to avenge the massacre of the 
'rench by the Spaniards there — Ed. 

A timorous capacity from prudence, 
From circumspection, infinite delay. 
Humility and modest awe themselves 
Betray me, serving often for a cloak 
To a more subtle selfishness ; that now 
Locks every function up in blank reserve, 
Now dupes me, trusting to an anxious eye 
That with intrusive restlessness beats off 
Simplicity and self-presented truth. 
Ah ! better far than this, to stray about 
Voluptuously through fields and rural walks, 
And ask no record of the hours, resigned 
To vacant musing, unreproved neglect 
Of all things, and deliberate holiday. 
Far better never to have heard the name 
Of zeal and just ambition, than to live 
Baffled and plagued by a mind that every hour 
Turns recreant to her task ; takes heart again, 
Then feels immediately some hollow thought 
Hang like an interdict upon her hopes. 
This is my lot ; for either still I find 
Some imperfection in the chosen theme, 
Or see of absolute accomplishment 
Much wanting, so much wanting, in myself, 
That I recoil and droop, and seek repose 
In listlessness from vain perplexity, 
Unprofitably travelling toward the grave, 
Like a false steward who hath much received 
And renders nothing back. 
Was it for this 
That one, the fairest of all rivers, loved 
To blend his murmurs with my nurse's song, 
And, from his alder shades and rocky falls, 
And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice 
That flowed along my dreams'? For this, didst 
thou, 
Derwent ! winding among grassy holms 
Where I was looking on, a babe in arms, 
Make ceaseless music that composed my thoughts 
To more than infant softness, giving me 
Amid the fretful dwellings of mankind 
A foretaste, a dim earnest, of the calm 
That Nature breathes among the hills and groves. 
When he had left the mountains and received 
On his smooth breast the shadow of those towers 
That yet survive, a shattered monument 
Of feudal sway, the bright blue river passed 
Along the margin of our terrace walk ; 
A tempting playmate whom we dearly loved. 
Oh, many a time have I, a five years' child, 
In a small mill-race severed from his stream, 
Made one long bathing of a summer's day ; 
Basked in the sun, and plunged and basked again 
Alternate, all a summer's day, or scoured 

_J 

- 

THE PRELUDE. 

The sandy fields, leaping through flowery groves 
Of yellow ragwort ; or when rock and hill, 
The woods, and distant Skiddaw's lofty height, 
Were bronzed with deepest radiance, stood alone 
Beneath the sky, as if I had been born 
On Indian plains, and from my mother's hut 
Had run abroad in wantonness, to sport 
A naked savage, in the thunder shower. 
Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up 
Fostered alike by beauty and by fear : 
Much favoured in my birth-place, and no less 
In that beloved Vale to which erelong 
We were transplanted — there were we let loose 
For sports of wider range. Ere I had told 
Ten birth-days, when among the mountain slopes 
Frost, and the breath of frosty wind, had snapped 
The last autumnal crocus, 'twas my joy 
With store of springes o'er my shoulder hung 
To range the open heights where woodcocks run 
Along the smooth green turf. Through half the 
night, 
Scudding away from snare to snare, I plied 
That anxious visitation ; — moon and stars 
Were shining o'er my head. I was alone, 
And seemed to be a trouble to the peace 
That dwelt among them. Sometimes it befel 
In these night wanderings, that a strong desire 
O'erpowered my better reason, and the bird 
Which was the captive of another's toil 
Became my prey ; and when the deed was done 
I heard among the solitary hills 
Low breathings coming after me, and sounds 
Of undistinguishable motion, steps 
Almost as silent as the turf they trod. 
Nor less when spring had warmed the cultured 
Vale, 
Moved we as plunderers where the mother-bird 
Had in high places built her lodge ; though mean 
Our object and inglorious, yet the end 
Was not ignoble. Oh ! when I have hung 
Above the raven's nest, by knots of grass 
And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock 
But ill sustained, and almost (so it seemed) 
Suspended by the blast that blew amain, 
Shouldering the naked crag, oh, at that time 
While on the perilous ridge I hung alone, 
With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind 
Blow through my ear ! the sky seemed not a sky 
Of earth — and with what motion moved the clouds ! 
Dust as we are, the immortal spirit grows 
Like harmony in music ; there is a dark 

Inscrutable workmanship that reconciles 
Discordant elements, makes them cling together 
In one society. How strange that all 
The terrors, pains, and early miseries, 
Regrets, vexations, lassitudes interfused 
Within my mind, should e'er have borne a part, 
And that a needful part, in making up 
The calm existence that is mine when I 
Am worthy of myself ! Praise to the end ! 
Thanks to the means which Nature deigned to 
employ ; 
Whether her fearless visitings, or those 
That came with soft alarm, like hurtless light 
Opening the peaceful clouds ; or she may use 
Severer interventions, ministry 
More palpable, as best might suit her aim. 
One summer evening (led by her) I found 
A little boat tied to a willow tree 
Within a rocky cave, its usual home. 
Straight I unloosed her chain, and stepping in 
Pushed from the shore. It was an act of stealth 
And troubled pleasure, nor without the voice 
Of mountain-echoes did my boat move on; 
Leaving behind her still, on either side, 
Small circles glittering idly in the moon, 
Until they melted all into one track 
Of sparkling light. But now, like one who rows, 
Proud of his skill, to reach a chosen point 
With an unswerving line, I fixed my view 
Upon the summit of a craggy ridge, 
The horizon's utmost boundary ; far above 
Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky. 
She was an elfin pinnace ; lustily 
I dipped my oars into the silent lake, 
And, as I rose upon the stroke, my boat 
Went heaving through the water like a swan ; 
When, from behind that craggy steep till then 
The horizon's bound, a huge peak, black and huge. 
As if with voluntary power instinct 
Upreared its head. I struck and struck again. 
And growing still in stature the grim shape 
Towered up between me and the stars, and still, 
For so it seemed, with purpose of its own 
And measured motion like a living thing, 
Strode after me. With trembling oars I turned. 
And through the silent water stole my way 
Back to the covert of the willow tree ; 
There in her mooring-place I left my bark, — 
And through the meadows homeward went, i" 
grave 
And serious mood ; but after I had seen 
That spectacle, for many days, my brain 
Worked with a dim and undetermined sense 

CHILDHOOD AND SCHOOL-TIME. 

 

Of unknown modes of being ; o'er my thoughts 
There bung a darkness, call it solitude 
Dr blank desertion. itSTo familiar shapes 
Remained, no pleasant images of trees, 
Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields ; 
But huge and migbty forms, that do not live 
'like living men, moved slowly through the mind 
y day, and were a trouble to my dreams. 
; "Wisdom and Spirit of the universe ! 
Thou Soul tbat art the eternity of thought, 
That givest to forms and images a breath 
And everlasting motion, not in vain 
y day or star-light thus from my first dawn 
Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me 
The passions that build up our human soul ; 
tfot with the mean and vulgar works of man, 
'But with high objects, with enduring things — 
With life and nature — purifying thus 
The elements of feeling and of thought, 
.ind sanctifying, by such discipline, 
Both pain and fear, until we recognise 
A grandeur in the beatings of the heart. 
Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me 
With stinted kindness. In November days, 
When vapours rolling down the valley made 
A. lonely scene more lonesome, among woods, 
At noon and 'mid the calm of summer nights, 
When, by the margin of the trembling lake, 
'Beneath the gloomy hills homeward I went 
in solitude, such intercourse was mine ; 
Mine was it in the fields both day and night, 
Ind by the waters, all the summer long. 
' And in the frosty season, when the sun 
Was set, and visible for many a mile 
rhe cottage windows blazed through twilight 
gloom, 
 heeded not their summons : happy time 
It was indeed for all of us — for me 
It was a time of rapture ! Clear and loud 
The village clock tolled six, — I wheeled about, 
Proud and exulting like an untired horse 
That cares not for his home. All shod with steel, 
We hissed along the polished ice in games 
Confederate, imitative of the chase 
And woodland pleasures, — the resounding horn, 
The pack loud chiming, and the hunted hare. 
So through the darkness and the cold we flew, 
I And not a voice was idle ; with the din 
Smitten, the precipices rang aloud ; 
The leafless trees and every icy crag 

These lines have been printed before. See p. .— Ed. 

Tinkled like iron ; while far distant hills 
Into the tumult sent an alien sound 
Of melancholy not unnoticed, while the stars 
Eastward were sparkling clear, and in the west 
The orange sky of evening died away. 
Not seldom from the uproar I retired 
Into a silent bay, or sportively 
Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng, 
To cut across the reflex of a star 
That fled, and, flying still before me, gleamed 
Upon the glassy plain ; and oftentimes, 
When we had given our bodies to the wind, 
And all the shadowy banks on either side 
Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning 
still 
The rapid line of motion, then at once 
Have I, reclining back upon my heels, 
Stopped short ; yet still the solitary cliffs 
Wheeled by me — even as if the earth had rolled 
With visible motion her diurnal round ! 
Behind me did they stretch in solemn train, 
Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched 
Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep. 
Ye Presences of Nature in the sky 
And on the earth ! Ye Visions of the hills ! 
And Souls of lonely places ! can I think 
A vulgar hope was yours when ye employed 
Such ministry, when ye through many a year 
Haunting me thus among my boyish sports, 
On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills, 
Impressed upon all forms the characters 
Of danger or desire ) and thus did make 
The surface of the universal earth 
With triumph and delight, with hope and fear, 
Work like a sea  
Not uselessly employed, 
Might I pursue this theme through every change 
Of exercise and play, to which the year 
Did summon us in his delightful round. 
We were a noisy crew ; the sun in heaven 
Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours ; 
Nor saw a band in happiness and joy 
Richer, or worthier of the ground they trod. 
I could record with no reluctant voice 
The woods of autumn, and their hazel bowers 
With milk-white clusters hung ; the rod and line, 
True symbol of hope's foolishness, whose strong 
And unreproved enchantment led us on 
By rocks and pools shut out from every star, 
All the green summer, to forlorn cascades 
Among the windings hid of mountain brooks. 
— Unfading recollections ! at this hour 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

The heart is almost mine with which I felt, 
From some hill-top on sunny afternoons, 
The paper kite high among fleecy clouds 
Pull at her rein like an impetuous courser ; 
Or, from the meadows sent on gusty days, 
Beheld her breast the wind, then suddenly 
Dashed headlong, and rejected by the storm. 
Ye lowly cottages wherein we dwelt, 
A ministration of your own was yours ; 
Can I forget you, being as you were 
So beautiful among the pleasant fields 
In which ye stood  or can I here forget 
The plain and seemly countenance with which 
Ye dealt out your plain comforts ? Yet had ye 
Delights and exultations of your own. 
Eager and never weary we pursued 
Our home-amusements by the warm peat-fire 
At evening, when with pencil, and smooth slate 
In square divisions parcelled out and all 
With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o'er, 
We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head 
In strife too humble to be named in verse : 
Or round the naked table, snow-white deal, 
Cherry or maple, sate in close array, 
And to the combat, Loo or Whist, led on 
A thick-ribbed army; not, as in the world, 
Neglected and ungratefully thrown by 
Even for the very service they had wrought, 
But husbanded through many a long campaign. 
Uncouth assemblage was it, where no few 
Had changed their functions ; some, plebeian cards 
Which Fate, beyond the promise of their birth, 
Had dignified, and called to represent 
The persons of departed potentates. 
Oh, with what echoes on the board they fell ! 
Ironic diamonds, — clubs, hearts, diamonds, spades, 
A congregation piteously akin ! 
Cheap matter offered they to boyish wit, 
Those sooty knaves, precipitated down 
With scoffs and taunts, like Vulcan out of heaven : 
The paramount ace, a moon in her eclipse, 
Queens gleaming through their splendour's last 
decay, 
And monarchs surly at the wrongs sustained 
By royal visages. Meanwhile abroad 
Incessant rain was falling, or the frost 
Raged bitterly, with keen and silent tooth ; 
And, interrupting oft that eager game, 
From under Esthwaite's splitting fields of ice 
The pent-up air, struggling to free itself, 
Gave out to meadow grounds and hills a loud 
Protracted yelling, like the noise of wolves 
Howling in troops along the Bothnic Main. 

Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace 
How Nature by extrinsic passion first 
Peopled the mind with forms sublime or fair, 
And made me love them, may I here omit 
How other pleasures have been mine, and joys 
Of subtler origin ; how I have felt, 
Not seldom even in that tempestuous time, 
Those hallowed and pure motions of the sense 
Which seem, in their simplicity, to own 
An intellectual charm; that calm delight 
Which, if I err not, surely must belong 
To those first-born affinities that fit 
Our new existence to existing things, 
And, in our dawn of being, constitute 
The bond of union between life and joy. 
Yes, I remember when the changeful earth, 
And twice five summers on my mind had stamped 
The faces of the moving year, even then 
I held unconscious intercourse with beauty 
Old as creation, drinking in a pure 
Organic pleasure from the silver wreaths 
Of curling mist, or from the level plain 
Of waters coloured by impending clouds. 
The sands of Westmoreland, the creeks and baya 
Of Cumbria's rocky limits, they can tell 
How, when the Sea threw off his evening shade, 
And to the shepherd's hut on distant hills 
Sent welcome notice of the rising moon, 
How I have stood, to fancies such as these 
A stranger, linking with the spectacle 
No conscious memory of a kindred sight, 
And bringing with me no peculiar sense 
Of quietness or peace ; yet have I stood, 
Even while mine eye hath moved o'er many a 
league 
Of shining water, gathering as it seemed 
Through every hair-breadth in that field of light 
New pleasure like a bee among the flowers. 
Thus oft amid those fits of vulgar joy 
Which, through all seasons, on a child's pursuits 
Are prompt attendants, 'mid that giddy bliss 
Which, like a tempest, works along the blood 
And is forgotten ; even then I felt 
Gleams like the flashing of a shield ; — the earth 
And common face of Nature spake to me 
Rememberable things ; sometimes, 'tis true, 
By chance collisions and quaint accidents 
(Like those ill-sorted unions, work supposed 
Of evil-minded fairies), yet not vain 
Nor profitless, if haply they impressed 
Collateral objects and appearances, 

SCHOOL-TIME. 

 

Albeit lifeless then, and doomed to sleep 
:Jntil maturer seasons called theni forth 
'Co impregnate and to elevate the mind. 
—And if the vulgar joy by its own weight 
.Vearied itself out of the memory, 
"he scenes which were a witness of that joy 
temained in their substantial lineaments 
)epicted on the brain, and to the eye 
:Vere visible, a daily sight ; and thus 
y the impressive discipline of fear, 
>y pleasure and repeated happiness, 
|o frequently repeated, and by force 
)f obscure feelings representative 
)f things forgotten, these same scenes so bright, 
o beautiful, so majestic in themselves, 
'hough yet the day was distant, did become 
labitually dear, and all their forms 
Vnd changeful colours by invisible links 
Vere fastened to the affections. 
I began 
ly story early — not misled, I trust, 
y an infirmity of love for days 
jlisowned by memory — ere the breath of spring 
lantlng my snowdrops among winter snows : 
Tor will it seem to thee, Friend ! so prompt 
p sympathy, that I have lengthened out 
iftth. fond and feeble tongue a tedious tale. 
Meanwhile, my hope has been, that I might fetch 

Invigorating thoughts from former years ; 
Might fix the wavering balance of my mind, 
And haply meet reproaches too, whose power 
May spur me on, in manhood now mature 
To honourable toil. Yet should these hopes 
Prove vain, and thus should neither I be taught 
To understand myself, nor thou to know 
With better knowledge how the heart was 
framed 
Of him thou lovest ; need I dread from thee 
Harsh judgments, if the song be loth to quit 
Those recollected hours that have the charm 
Of visionary things, those lovely forms 
And sweet sensations that throw back our life, 
And almost make remotest infancy 
A visible scene, on which the sun is shining ? 
One end at least hath been attained ; my mind 
Hath been revived, and if this genial mood 
Desert me not, forthwith shall be brought down 
Through later years the story of my life. 
The road lies plain before me ; — 'tis a theme 
Single and of determined bounds ; and hence 
I choose it rather at this time, than work 
Of ampler or more varied argument, 
Where I might be discomfited and lost : 
And certain hopes are with me, that to thee 
This labour will be welcome, honoured Friend ! 

BOOK SECOND. 

SCHOOL-TIME. 
CONTINUED. 
hus far, Friend ! have we, though leaving much 
nvisited, endeavoured to retrace 
he simple ways in which my childhood walked ; 
hose chiefly that first led me to the love 
f rivers, woods, and fields. The passion yet 
'as in its birth, sustained as might befal 
V nourishment that came unsought ; for still 
"om week to week, from month to month, we 
lived 
 round of tumult. Duly were our games 
I'olonged in summer till the day-light failed : 
jo chair remained before the doors ; the bench 
ad threshold steps were empty ; fast asleep 
ie labourer, and the old man who had sate 

A later lingerer ; yet the revelry 
Continued and the loud uproar : at last, 
When all the ground was dark, and twinkling stars 
Edged the black clouds, home and to bed we went, 
Feverish with weary joints and beating minds. 
Ah ! is there one who ever has been young, 
Nor needs a warning voice to tame the pride 
Of intellect and virtue's self-esteem  
One is there, though the wisest and the best 
Of all mankind, who covets not at times 
Union that cannot be ; — who would not give 
If so he might, to duty and to truth 
The eagerness of infantine desire ] 
A tranquillising spirit presses now 
On my corporeal frame, so wide appears 
The vacancy between me and those days 
Which yet have such self-presence in my mind, 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

That, musing on them, often do I seem 
Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself 
And of some other Being. A rude mass 
Of native rock, left midway in the square 
Of our small market village, was the goal 
Or centre of these sports ; and when, returned 
After long absence, thither I repaired, 
Gone was the old grey stone, and in its place 
A smart Assembly-room usurped the ground 
That had been ours. There let the fiddle scream, 
And be ye happy ! Yet, my Friends ! I know 
That more than one of you will think with me 
Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame 
From whom the stone was named, who there had 
sate. 
And watched her table with its huckster's wares 
Assiduous, through the length of sixty years. 
We ran a boisterous course; the year span round 
With giddy motion. But the time approached 
That brought with it a regular desire 
For calmer pleasures, when the winning forms 
Of Nature were collaterally attached 
To every scheme of holiday delight 
And every boyish sport, less grateful else 
And languidly pursued. 
When summer came, 
Our pastime was, on bright half-holidays, 
To sweep along the plain of Windermere 
With rival oars ; and the selected bourne 
Was now an Island musical with birds 
That sang and ceased not ; now a Sister Isle 
Beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert, sown 
With lilies of the valley like a field ; 
And now a third small Island, where survived 
In solitude the ruins of a shrine 
Once to Our Lady dedicate, and served 
Daily with chaunted rites. In such a race 
So ended, disappointment could be none, 
Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy: 
We rested in the shade, all pleased alike, 
Conquered and conqueror. Thus the pride of 
strength, 
And the vain-glory of superior skill, 
Were tempered ; thus was gradually produced 
A quiet independence of the heart ; 
And to my Friend who knows me I may add, 
Fearless of blame, that hence for future days 
Ensued a diffidence and modesty, 
And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much, 
The self-sufficing power of Solitude. 
Our daily meals were frugal, Sabine fare ! 
More than we wished we knew the blessing then 

Of vigorous hunger — hence corporeal strength 
Unsapped by delicate viands ; for, exclude 
A little weekly stipend, and we lived 
Through three divisions of the quartered year 
In penniless poverty. But now to school 
From the half-yearly holidays returned, 
We came with weightier purses, that sufficed 
To furnish treats more costly than the Dame 
Of the old grey stone, from her scant boar/ 
supplied. 
Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground, 
Or in the woods, or by a river side 
Or shady fountains, while among the leaves 
Soft airs were stirring, and the mid-day sun 
Unfelt shone brightly round us in our joy. 
Nor is my aim neglected if I tell 
How sometimes, in the length of those half-year 
We from our funds drew largely ; — proud to curl 
And eager to spur on, the galloping steed ; 
And with the courteous inn-keeper, whose stud 
Supplied our want, we haply might employ 
Sly subterfuge, if the adventure's bound 
Were distant : some famed temple where of yoi 
The Druids worshipped, or the antique walls 
Of that large abbey, where within the Vale 
Of Nightshade, to St. Mary's honour built, 
Stands yet a mouldering pile with fractured arc! 
Belfry, and images, and living trees ; 
A holy scene ! — Along the smooth green turf 
Our horses grazed. To more than inland peace, 
Left by the west wind sweeping overhead 
From a tumultuous ocean, trees and towers 
In that sequestered valley may be seen, 
Both silent and both motionless alike ; 
Such the deep shelter that is there, and such 
The safeguard for repose and quietness. 
Our steeds remounted and the summons givei 
With whip and spur we through the chauntry fle 
In uncouth race, and left the cross-legged knigh 
And the stone-abbot, and that single wren 
Which one day sang so sweetly in the nave 
Of the old church, that — though from recer 
showers 
The earth was comfortless, and, touched by fail 
Internal breezes, sobbings of the place 
And respirations, from the roofless walls 
The shuddering ivy dripped large drops — yet sti 
So sweetly 'mid the gloom the invisible bird 
Sang to herself, that there I could have made 
My dwelling-place, and lived for ever there 
To hear such music. Through the walls we fle 
And down the valley, and, a circuit made 
In wantonness of heart, through rough and smoot 

SCHOOL-TIME. 

 

■ We scampered homewards. Oh, ye rocks and 
streams, 
And that still spirit shed from evening air ! 
Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt 
Tour presence, when with slackened step we 
breathed 
Along the sides of the steep hills, or when 
Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea 
We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. 
Midway on long Winander's eastern shore, 
Within the crescent of a pleasant bay, 
A tavern stood ; no homely-featured house, 
Primeval like its neighbouring cottages, 
But 'twas a splendid place, the door beset 
With chaises, grooms, and liveries, and within 
Decanters, glasses, and the blood-red wine. 
' In ancient times, and ere the Hall was built 
On the large island, had this dwelling been 
More worthy of a poet's love, a hut, 
Proud of its own bright fire and sycamore shade. 
But — though the rhymes were gone that once 
inscribed 
The threshold, and large golden characters, 
Spread o'er the spangled sign-board, had dislodged 
The old Lion and usurped his place, in slight 
And mockery of the rustic painter's hand — 
Yet, to this hour, the spot to me is dear 
With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay 
Upon a slope surmounted by a plain 
Of a small bowling-green ; beneath us stood 
A grove, wi th gleams of water through the trees 
And over the tree-tops ; nor did we want 
Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream. 
There, while through half an afternoon we played 
On the smooth platform, whether skill prevailed 
Or happy blunder triumphed, bursts of glee 
Made all the mountains ring. But, ere night-fall, 
•When in our pinnace we returned at leisure 
Over the shadowy lake, and to the beach 
Of some small island steered our course with one, 
The Minstrel of the Troop, and left him there, 
And rowed off gently, while he blew his flute 
Alone upon the rock — oh, then, the calm 
And dead still water lay upon my mind 
Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky, 
Never before so beautiful, sank down 
Into my heart, and held me like a dream ! 
Thus were my sympathies enlarged, and thus 
|Daily the common range of visible things 
Grew dear to me : already I began 
To love the sun ; a boy I loved the sun, 
Not as I since have loved him, as a pledge 
And surety of our earthly life, a light 

Which we behold and feel we are alive ; 
Nor for his bounty to so many worlds — 
But for this cause, that I had seen him lay 
His beauty on the morning hills, had seen 
The western mountain touch his setting orb, 
In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess 
Of happiness, my blood appeared to flow 
For its own pleasure, and I breathed with joy. 
And, from like feelings, humble though intense, 
To patriotic and domestic love 
Analogous, the moon to me was dear ; 
For I could dream away my purposes, 
Standing to gaze upon her while she hung 
Midway between the hills, as if she knew 
No other region, but belonged to thee, 
Yea, appertained by a peculiar right 
To thee and thy grey huts, thou one dear Vale ! 
Those incidental charms which first attached 
My heart to rural objects, day by day 
Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell 
How Nature, intervenient till this time 
And secondary, now at length was sought 
For her own sake. But who shall parcel out 
His intellect by geometric rules, 
Split like a province into round and square ? 
Who knows the individual hour in which 
His habits were first sown, even as a seed ? 
Who that shall point as with a wand and say 
" This portion of the river of my mind 
Came from yon fountain ? " Thou, my Friend ! 
art one 
More deeply read in thy own thoughts ; to thee 
Science appears but what in truth she is, 
Not as our glory and our absolute boast, 
But as a succedaneum, and a prop 
To our infirmity. No officious slave 
Art thou of that false secondary power 
By which we multiply distinctions, then 
Deem that our puny boundaries are things 
That we perceive, and not that we have made. 
To thee, unblinded by these formal arts, 
The unity of all hath been revealed, 
And thou wilt doubt, with me less aptly skilled 
Than many are to range the faculties 
In scale and order, class the cabinet 
Of their sensations, and in voluble phrase 
Bun through the history and birth of each 
As of a single independent thing. 
Hard task, vain hope, to analyse the mind, 
If each most obvious and particular thought, 
Not in a mystical and idle sense, 
But in the words of Reason deeply weighed, 
Hath no beginning. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Blest the infant Babe, 
(For with my best conjecture I would trace 
Our Being's earthly progress,) blest the Babe, 
Nursed in his Mother's arms, who sinks to sleep 
Rocked on his Mother's breast; who with his soul 
Drinks in the feelings of his Mother's eye ! 
For him, in one dear Presence, there exists 
A virtue which irradiates and exalts 
Objects through widest intercourse of sense. 
No outcast he, bewildered and depressed : 
Along his infant veins are interfused 
The gravitation and the filial bond 
Of nature that connect him with the world. 
Is there a flower, to which he points with hand 
Too weak to gather it, already love 
Drawn from love's purest earthly fount for him 
Hath beautified that flower ; already shades 
Of pity cast from inward tenderness 
Do fall around him upon aught that bears 
Unsightly marks of violence or harm. 
Emphatically such a Being lives, 
Frail creature as he is, helpless as frail, 
An inmate of this active universe : 
For feeling has to him imparted power 
That through the growing faculties of sense 
Doth like an agent of the. one great Mind 
Create, creator and receiver both, 
Working but in alliance with the works 
Which it beholds. — Such, verily, is the first 
Poetic spirit of our human life, 
By uniform control of after years, 
In most, abated or suppressed ; in some, 
Through every change of growth and of decay, 
Pre-eminent till death. 
From early days, 
Beginning not long after that first time 
In which, a Babe, by intercourse of touch 
I held mute dialogues with my Mother's heart, 
I have endeavoured to display the means 
Whereby this infant sensibility, 
Great birthright of our being, was in me 
Augmented and sustained. Yet is a path 
More difficult before me ; and I fear 
That in its broken windings we shall need 
The chamois' sinews, and the eagle's wing : 
For now a trouble came into my mind 
From unknown causes. I was left alone 
Seeking the visible world, nor knowing why. 
The props of my affections were removed, 
And yet the building stood, as if sustained 
By its own spirit ! All that I beheld 
Was dear, and hence to finer influxes 
The mind lay open to a more exact 
And close communion. Many are our joys 

In youth, but oh ! what happiness to live 
When every hour brings palpable access 
Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight, 
And sorrow is not there ! The seasons came, 
And every season wheresoe'er I moved 
Unfolded transitory qualities, 
Which, but for this most watchful power of love, 
Had been neglected ; left a register 
Of permanent relations, else unknown. 
Hence life, and change, and beauty, solitude 
More active even than "best society" — 
Society made sweet as solitude 
By silent inobtrusive sympathies, 
And gentle agitations of the mind 
From manifold distinctions, difference 
Perceived in things, where, to the unwatchful eye, 
No difference is, and hence, from the same source, 
Sublimer joy ; for I would walk alone, 
Under the quiet stars, and at that time 
Have felt whate'er there is of power in sound 
To breathe an elevated mood, by form 
Or image unprofaned ; and I would stand, 
If the night blackened with a coming storm, 
Beneath some rock, listening to notes that are 
The ghostly language of the ancient earth, 
Or make their dim abode in distant winds. 
Thence did I drink the visionary power ; 
And deem not profitless those fleeting moods 
Of shadowy exultation : not for this, 
That they are kindred to our purer mind 
And intellectual life ; but that the soul, 
Remembering how she felt, but what she felt 
Remembering not, retains an obscure sense 
Of possible sublimity, whereto 
With growing faculties she doth aspire, 
With faculties still growing, feeling still 
That whatsoever point they gain, they yet 
Have something to pursue. 
And not alone, 
'Mid gloom and tumult, but no less 'mid fair 
And tranquil scenes, that universal power 
And fitness in the latent qualities 
And essences of things, by which the mind 
Is moved with feelings of delight, to me 
Came strengthened with a superadded soul, 
A virtue not its own. My morning walk 
Were early; — oft before the hours of school 
I travelled round our little lake, five miles 
Of pleasant wandering. Happy time ! more dear 
For this, that one was by my side, a Friend.. 
Then passionately loved ; with heart how full 

 The late Rev. John Fleming, of Rayrigg, Winder- 
mere. — Ed. 

SCHOOL-TIME. 

 

Would he peruse these lines ! For many years 
.Have since flowed in between us, and, our minds 
Both silent to each other, at this time 
"We live as if those hours had never been. 
Nor seldom did I lift our cottage latch 
Far earlier, ere one smoke-wreath had risen 
From human dwelling, or the vernal thrush 
Was audible ; and sate among the woods 
Alone upon some jutting eminence, 
At the first gleam of dawn-light, when the Vale, 
Tet slumbering, lay in utter solitude. 
How shall I seek the origin ! where find 
Faith in the marvellous things which then I felt? 
Oft in these moments such a holy calm 
Would overspread my soul, that bodily eyes 
Were utterly forgotten, and what I saw 
Appeared like something in myself, a dream, 
A prospect in the mind. 
'Twere long to tell 
What spring and autumn, what the winter snows, 
And what the summer shade, what day and night, 
Evening and morning, sleep and waking, thought 
(From sources inexhaustible, poured forth 
To feed the spirit of religious love 
In which I walked with Nature. But let this 
Be not forgotten, that I still retained 
My first creative sensibility; 
That by the regular action of the world 
My soul was unsubdued. A plastic power 
Abode with me ; a forming hand, at times 
Rebellious, acting in a devious mood ; 
A local spirit of his own, at war 
With general tendency, but, for the most, 
Subservient strictly to external things 
With which it communed. An auxiliar light 
Came from my mind, which on the setting sun 
Bestowed new splendour ; the melodious birds, 
The fluttering breezes, fountains that run on 
(Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obeyed 
A like dominion, and the midnight storm 
Grew darker in the presence of my eye : 
Hence my obeisance, my devotion hence, 
And hence my transport. 
Nor should this, perchance, 
Pass unrecorded, that I still had loved 
The exercise and produce of a toil, 
Than analytic industry to me 
More pleasing, and whose character I deem 
Is more poetic as resembling more 
Creative agency. The song would speak 
Pf that interminable building reared 
iy observation of affinities 
jfn objects where no brotherhood exists 
To passive minds. My seventeenth year was come; 

And, whether from this habit rooted now 
So deeply in my mind, or from excess 
In the great social principle of life 
Coercing all things into sympathy, 
To unorganic natures were transferred 
My own enjoyments ; or the power of truth 
Coming in revelation, did converse 
With things that really are ; I, at this time, 
Saw blessings spread around me like a sea. 
Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on, 
From Nature and her overflowing soul, 
I had received so much, that all my thoughts 
Were steeped in feeling ; I was only then 
Contented, when with bliss ineffable 
I felt the sentiment of Being spread 
O'er all that moves and all that seemeth still ; 
O'er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought 
And human knowledge, to the human eye 
Invisible, yet liveth to the heart ; 
O'er all that leaps and runs, and shouts and sings, 
Or beats the gladsome air ; o'er all that glides 
Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself, 
And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not 
If high the transport, great the joy I felt, 
Communing in this sort through earth and heaven 
With every form of creature, as it looked 
Towards the Uncreated with a countenance 
Of adoration, with an eye of love. 
One song they sang, and it was audible, 
Most audible, then, when the fleshly ear, 
O'ercome by humblest prelude of that strain, 
Forgot her functions, and slept undisturbed. 
If this be error, and another faith 
Find easier access to the pious mind, 
Yet were I grossly destitute of all 
Those human sentiments that make this earth 
So dear, if I should fail with grateful voice 
To speak of you, ye mountains, and ye lakes 
And sounding cataracts, ye mists and winds 
That dwell among the hills where I was born. 
If in my youth I have been pure in heart, 
If, mingling with the world, I am content 
With my own modest pleasures, and have lived 
With God and Nature communing, removed 
From little enmities and low desires, 
The gift is yours ; if in these times of fear, 
This melancholy waste of hopes o'erthrown, 
If, 'mid indifference and apathy, 
And wicked exultation when good men 
On every side fall off, we know not how, 
To selfishness, disguised in gentle names 
Of peace and quiet and domestic love, 
Yet mingled not unwillingly with sneers 

 

THE PEELUDE. 

On visionary minds ; if, in this time 
Of dereliction and dismay, I yet 
Despair not of our nature, but retain 
A more than Roman confidence, a faith 
That fails not, in all sorrow my support, 
The blessing of my life ; the gift is yours, 
Ye winds and sounding cataracts ! 'tis yours, 
Ye mountains ! thine, Nature ! Thou hast fed 
My lofty speculations ; and in thee, 
For this uneasy heart of ours, I find 
A never-failing principle of joy 
And purest passion. 
Thou, my Friend ! wert reared 
In the great city, 'mid far other scenes ; 
But we, by different roads, at length have gained 
The self same bourne. And for this cause to thee 
I speak, unapprehensive of contempt, 

The insinuated scoff of coward tongues, 
And all that silent language which so oft 
In conversation between man and man 
Blots from the human countenance all trace 
Of beauty and of love. For thou hast sought 
The truth in solitude, and, since the days 
That gave thee liberty, full long desired, 
To serve in Nature's temple, thou hast been 
The most assiduous of her ministers ; 
In many things my brother, chiefly here 
In this our deep devotion. 
Fare thee well ! 
Health and the quiet of a healthful mind 
Attend thee ! seeking oft the haunts of men, 
And yet more often living with thyself, 
And for thyself, so haply shall thy days 
Be many, and a blessing to mankind. 

BOOK THIRD 

RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE. 

It was a dreary morning when the wheels 
Rolled over a wide plain o'erhung with clouds, 
And nothing cheered our way till first we saw 
The long-roofed chapel of King's College lift 
Turrets and pinnacles in answering files, 
Extended high above a dusky grove. 
Advancing, we espied upon the road 
A student clothed in gown and tasselled cap, 
Striding along as if o'ertasked by Time, 
Or covetous of exercise and air ; 
He passed — nor was I master of my eyes 
Till he was left an arrow's flight behind. 
As near and nearer to the spot we drew, 
It seemed to suck us in with an eddy's force. 
Onward we drove beneath the Castle ; caught, 
While crossing Magdalene Bridge, a glimpse of 
Cam; 
And at the Hoop alighted, famous Inn. 
My spirit was up, my thoughts were full of 
hope ; 
Some friends I had, acquaintances who there 
Seemed friends, poor simple school-boys, now 
hung round 

With honour and importance : in a world 
Of welcome faces up and down I roved ; 
Questions, directions, warnings and advice, 
Flowed in upon me, from all sides ; fresh day 
Of pride and pleasure ! to myself I seemed 
A man of business and expense, and went 
From shop to shop about my own affairs, 
To Tutor or to Tailor, as befel, 
From street to street with loose and careless mind, 
I was the Dreamer, they the Dream ; I roamed 
Delighted through the motley spectacle ; 
Gowns grave, or gaudy, doctors, students, streets, 
Courts, cloisters, flocks of churches, gateway-, 
towers : 
Migration strange for a stripling of the hills, 
A northern villager. 
As if the change 
Had waited on some Fairy's wand, at once 
Behold me rich in monies, and attired 
In splendid garb, with hose of silk, and hair 
Powdered like rimy trees, when frost is keen. 
My lordly dressing-gown, I pass it by, 
With other signs of manhood that supplied 
The lack of beard. — The weeks went roundly on, 
With invitations, suppers, wine and fruit, 
Smooth housekeeping within, and all without 
Liberal, and suiting gentleman's array. 

RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE. 

 

The Evangelist St. John my patron was : 
■Three Gothic courts are his, and in the first 
Was my ahiding-place, a nook ohscure ; 
Ri^ht underneath, the College kitchens made 
A humming sound, less tuneable than bees, 
But hardly less industrious ; with shrill notes 
Of sharp command and scolding intermixed. 
Near me hung Trinity's loquacious clock, 
Who never let the quarters, night or day, 
Slip by him unproclaimed, and told the hours 
'Twice over with a male and female voice. 
Her pealing organ was my neighbour too ; 
And from my pillow, looking forth by light 
Of moon or favouring stars, I could behold 
The antechapel where the statue stood 
Of Newton with his prism and silent face, 
The marble index of a mind for ever 
.Voyaging through strange seas of Thought, alone. 
Of College labours, of the Lecturer's room 
All studded round, as thick as chairs could stand, 
With loyal students, faithful to their books, 
Half-and-half idlers, hardy recusants, 
And honest dunces — of important days, 
Examinations, when the man was weighed 
As in a balance ! of excessive hopes, 
Tremblings withal and commendable fears, 
iSmall jealousies, and triumphs good or bad — 
Let others that know more speak as they know. 
[Such glory was but little sought by me, 
And little won. Yet from the first crude days 
Of settling time in this untried abode, 
I was disturbed at times by prudent thoughts, 
Wishing to hope without a hope, some fears 
,About my future worldly maintenance, 
j And, more than all, a strangeness in the mind, 
A feeling that I was not for that hour, 
Nor for that place. But wherefore be cast down ? 
For (not to speak of Reason and her pure 
Reflective acts to fix the moral law 
Deep in the conscience, nor of Christian Hope, 
Bowing her head before her sister Faith 
As one far mightier), hither I had come, 
Bear witness Truth, endowed with holy powers 
And faculties, whether to work or feel. 
Oft when the dazzling show no longer new 
'Had ceased to dazzle, ofttimes did I quit 
•My comrades, leave the crowd, buildings and 
groves, 
And as I paced alone the level fields 
Far from those lovely sights and sounds sublime 
With which I had been conversant, the mind 
Drooped not ; but there into herself returning, 
With prompt rebound seemed fresh as heretofore. 

At least I more distinctly recognised 
Her native instincts : let me dare to speak 
A higher language, say that now I felt 
What independent solaces were mine, 
To mitigate the injurious sway of place 
Or circumstance, how far soever changed 
In youth, or to be changed in after years. 
As if awakened, summoned, roused, constrained, 
I looked for universal things ; perused 
The common countenance of earth and sky : 
Earth, nowhere unembellished by some trace 
Of that first Paradise whence man was driven ; 
And sky, whose beauty and bounty are expressed 
By the proud name she bears — the name of 
Heaven. 
I called on both to teach me what they might ; 
Or turning the mind in upon herself 
Pored, watched, expected, listened, spread my 
thoughts 
And spread them with a wider creeping ; felt 
Incumbencies more awful, visitings 
Of the Upholder of the tranquil soul, 
That tolerates the indignities of Time, 
And, from the centre of Eternity 
All finite motions overruling, lives 
In glory immutable. But peace ! enough 
Here to record that I was mounting now 
To such community with highest truth — • 
A track pursuing, not untrod before, 
From strict analogies by thought supplied 
Or consciousnesses not to be subdued. 
To every natural form, rock, fruit or flower, 
Even the loose stones that cover the high-way, 
I gave a moral life : I saw them feel, 
Or linked them to some feeling : the great mass 
Lay bedded in a quickening soul, and all 
That I beheld respired with inward meaning. 
Add that whate'er of Terror or of Love 
Or Beauty, Nature's daily face put on 
From transitory passion, unto this 
I was as sensitive as waters are 
To the sky's influence in a kindred mood 
Of passion ; was obedient as a lute 
That waits upon the touches of the wind. 
Unknown, unthought of, yet I was most rich — 
I had a world about me — 'twas my own ; 
I made it, for it only lived to me, 
And to the God who sees into the heart. 
Such sympathies, though rarely, were betrayed 
By outward gestures and by visible looks : 
"Some called it madness — so indeed it was, 
If child-like fruitfulness in passing joy, 
If steady moods of thoughtfulness matured 
To inspiration, sort with such a name ; 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

If prophecy be madness ; if things viewed 
By poets in old time, and higher up 
By the first men, earth's first inhabitants, 
May in these tutored days no' more be seen 
With undisordered sight. But leaving this, 
It was no madness, for the bodily eye 
Amid my strongest workings evermore 
Was searching out the lines of difference 
As they lie hid in all external forms, 
Near or remote, minute or vast ; an eye 
Which, from a tree, a stone, a withered leaf, 
To the broad ocean and the azure heavens 
Spangled with kindred multitudes of stars, 
Could find no surface where its power might 
sleep ; 
Which spake perpetual logic to my soul, 
And by an unrelenting agency 
Did bind my feelings even as in a chain. 
And here, Friend ! have I retraced my life 
Up to an eminence, and told a tale 
Of matters which not falsely may be called 
The glory of my youth. Of genius, power, 
Creation and divinity itself 
I have been speaking, for my theme has been 
What passed within me. Not of outward things 
Done visibly for other minds, words, signs, 
Symbols or actions, but of my own heart 
Have I been speaking, and my youthful mind. 
Heavens ! how awful is the might of souls, 
And what they do within themselves while yet 
The yoke of earth is new to them, the world 
Nothing but a wild field where they were sown. 
This is, in truth, heroic argument, 
This genuine prowess, which I wished to touch 
With hand however weak, but in the main 
It lies far hidden from the reach of words. 
Points have we all of us within our souls 
Where all stand single ; this I feel, and make 
Breathings for incommunicable powers; 
But is not each a memory to himself, 
And, therefore, now that we must quit this theme, 
 am not heartless, for there's not a man 
That lives who hath not known his god-like hours, 
And feels not what an empire we inherit 
As natural beings in the strength of Nature. 
No more : for now into a populous plain 
We must descend. A Traveller I am, 
Whose tale is only of himself; even so, 
So be it, if the pure of heart be prompt 
To follow, and if thou, my honoured Friend ! 
Who in these thoughts art ever at my side, 
Support, as heretofore, my fainting steps. 

It hath been told, that when the first delight 
That flashed upon me from this novel show 
Had failed, the mind returned into herself; 
Yet true it is, that I had made a change 
In climate, and my nature's outward coat 
Changed also slowly and insensibly. 
Full oft the quiet and exalted thoughts 
Of loneliness gave way to empty noise 
And superficial pastimes ; now and then 
Forced labour, and more frequently forced hopes ; 
And, worst of all, a treasonable growth 
Of indecisive judgments, that impaired 
And shook the mind's simplicity. — And yet 
This was a gladsome time. Could I behold — 
Who, less insensible than sodden clay 
In a sea-river's bed at ebb of tide, 
Could have beheld, — with undelighted heart, 
So many happy youths, so wide and fair 
A congregation in its budding-time 
Of health, and hope, and beauty, all at once 
So many divers samples from the growth 
Of life's sweet season — could have seen unmoved 
That miscellaneous garland of wild flowers 
Decking the matron temples of a place 
So famous through the world  To me, at least, 
It was a goodly prospect : for, in sooth, 
Though I had learnt betimes to stand unpropped, 
And independent musings pleased me so 
That spells seemed on me when I was alone, 
Yet could I only cleave to solitude 
In lonely places ; if a throng was near 
That way I leaned by nature ; for my heart 
Was social, and loved idleness and joy. 
Not seeking those who might participate 
My deeper pleasures (nay, I had not once, 
Though not unused to mutter lonesome songs, 
Even with myself divided such delight, 
Or looked that way for aught thatmight be clothed 
In human language), easily I passed 
From the remembrances of better things, 
And slipped into the ordinary works 
Of careless youth, unburthened, unalarmeJ. 
Caverns there were within my mind which sun 
Could never penetrate, yet did there not 
Want store of leafy arbours where the light 
Might enter in at will. Companionships, 
Friendships, acquaintances, were welcome all. 
We sauntered, played, or rioted ; we talked 
Unprofitable talk at morning hours ; 
Drifted about along the streets and walks, 
Read lazily in trivial books, went forth 
To gallop through the country in blind zeal 
Of senseless horsemanship, or on the breast 

RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE. 

 

,f Cam sailed boisterously, and let the stars 
,Come forth, perhaps without one quiet thought. 
Such was the tenor of the second act 
In this new life. Imagination slept, 
And yet not utterly. I could not print 
Ground where the grass had yielded to the steps 
Of generations of illustrious men, 
Unmoved. I could not always lightly pass 
.Through the same gateways, sleep where they had 
slept, 
Wake where they waked, range that inclosure old, 
That garden of great intellects, undisturbed. 
Place also by the side of this dark sense 
Of noble feeling, that those spiritual men, 
Even the great Newton's own ethereal self, 
Seemed humbled in these precincts thence to be 
•The more endeared. Their several memories here 
(Even like their persons in their portraits clothed 
With the accustomed garb of daily life) 
Put on a lowly and a touching grace 
(Of more distinct humanity, that left 
jAll genuine admiration unimpaired. 
Beside the pleasant Mill of Trompington 
b laughed with Chaucer in the hawthorn shade ; 
: Heard him, while birds were warbling, tell his tales 
|:f amorous passion. And that gentle Bard, 
i Chosen by the Muses for their Page of State — 
Sweet Spenser, moving through his clouded 
heaven 
With the moon's beauty and the moon's soft pace, 
j[ called him Brother, Englishman, and Friend ! 
Tea, our blind Poet, who in his later day, 
Stood almost single ; uttering odious truth — 
Darkness before, and danger's voice behind, 
oul awful — if the earth has ever lodged 
in awful soul — I seemed to see him here 
familiarly, and in his scholar's dress 
ounding before me, yet a stripling youth — 
A boy, no better, with his rosy cheeks 
ingelical, keen eye, courageous look, 
A.nd conscious step of purity and pride, 
.imong the band of my compeers was one 
Whom chance had stationed in the very room 
ionoured by Milton's name. temperate Bard ! 
c it confest that, for the first time, seated 
Within thy innocent lodge and oratory, 
)ne of a festive circle, I poured out 
|jihations, to thy memory drank, till pride 
j^-nd gratitude grew dizzy in a brain 
frever excited by the fumes of wine 
jefore that hour, or since. Then, forth I ran 
^rom the assembly; through a length of streets, 

Ran, ostrich-like, to reach our chapel door 
In not a desperate or opprobrious time, 
Albeit long after the importunate bell 
Had stopped, with wearisome Cassandra voice 
No longer haunting the dark winter night. 
Call back, Friend ! a moment to thy mind, 
The place itself and fashion of the rites. 
With careless ostentation shouldering up 
My surplice, through the inferior throng I clove 
Of the plain Burghers, who in audience stood 
On the last skirts of their permitted ground, 
Under the pealing organ. Empty thoughts ! 
I am ashamed of them : and that great Bard, 
And thou, Friend ! who in thy ample mind 
Hast placed me high above my best deserts, 
Ye will forgive the weakness of that hour, 
In some of its unworthy vanities, 
Brother to many more. 
In this mixed sort 
The months passed on, remissly, not given up 
To wilful alienation from the right, 
Or walks of open scandal, but in vague 
And loose indifference, easy likings, aims 
Of a low pitch — duty and zeal dismissed, 
Yet Nature, or a happy course of things 
Not doing in their stead the needful work. 
The memory languidly revolved, the heart 
Reposed in noontide rest, the inner pulse 
Of contemplation almost failed to beat. 
Such life might not inaptly be compared 
To a floating island, an amphibious spot 
Unsound, of spongy texture, yet withal 
Not wanting a fair face of water weeds 
And pleasant flowers. The thirst of living praise, 
Fit reverence for the glorious Dead, the sight 
Of those long vistas, sacred catacombs, 
Where mighty minds lie visibly entombed, 
Have often stirred the heart of youth, and bred 
A fervent love of rigorous discipline. — 
Alas ! such high emotion touched not me. 
Look was there none within these walls to shame 
My easy spirits, and discountenance 
i Their light composure, far less to instil 
A calm resolve of mind, firmly addressed 
To puissant efforts. Nor was this the blame 
Of others but my own; I should, in truth, 
As far as doth concern my single self, 
Misdeem most widely, lodging it elsewhere : 
For I, bred up 'mid Nature's luxuries, 
Was a spoiled child, and, rambling like the wind, 
As I had done in daily intercourse 
With those crystalline rivers, solemn heights, 
And mountains, ranging like a fowl of the air, 
I was ill-tutored for captivity ; 

t 

THE PRELUDE. 

To quit my pleasure, and, from month to month, 
Take up a station calmly on the perch 
Of sedentary peace. Those lovely forms 
Had also left less space within my mind, 
Which, wrought upon instinctively, had found 
A freshness in those objects of her love, 
A winning power, beyond all other power. 
Not that I slighted books, — that were to lack 
All sense, — but other passions in me ruled, 
Passions more fervent, making me less prompt 
To in-door study than was wise or well, 
Or suited to those years. Yet I, though used 
In magisterial liberty to rove, 
Culling such flowers of learning as might tempt 
A random choice, could shadow forth a place 
(If now I yield not to a flattering dream) 
Whose studious aspect should have bent me 
down 
To instantaneous service; should at once 
Have made me pay to science and to arts 
And written lore, acknowledged my liege lord, 
A homage frankly offered up, like that 
Which I had paid to Nature. Toil and pains 
In this recess, by thoughtful Fancy built, 
Should spread from heart to heart ; and stately 
groves, 
Majestic edifices, should not want 
A corresponding dignity within. 
The congregating temper that pervades 
Our unripe years, not wasted, should be taught 
To minister to works of high attempt — 
Works which the enthusiast would perform with 
love. 
Youth should be awed, religiously possessed 
With a conviction of the power that waits 
On knowledge, when sincerely sought and prized 
For its own sake, on glory and on praise 
If but by labour won, and fit to endure 
The passing day ; should learn to put aside 
Her trappings here, should strip them off abashed 
Before antiquity and stedfast truth 
And strong book-mindedness ; and over all 
A healthy sound simplicity should reign, 
A seemly plainness, name it what you will, 
Eepublican or pious. 
If these thoughts 
Are a gratuitous emblazonry 
That mocks the recreant age we live in, then 
Be Folly and False-seeming free to affect 
Whatever formal gait of discipline 
Shall raise them highest in their own esteem — 
Let them parade among the Schools at will, 
But spare the House of God. Was ever known 
The witless shepherd who persists to drive 

A flock that thirsts not to a pool disliked ] 
A weight must surely hang on days begun 
And ended with such mockery. Be wise, 
Ye Presidents and Deans, and, till the spirit 
Of ancient times revive, and youth be trained 
At home in pious service, to' your bells 
Give seasonable rest, for 'tis a sound 
Hollow as ever vexed the tranquil air; 
And your officious doings bring disgrace 
On the plain steeples of our English Church, 
Whose worship, 'mid remotest village tree, 
Suffers for this. Even Science, too, at hand 
In daily sight of this irreverence, 
Is smitten thence with an unnatural taint, 
Loses her just authority, falls beneath 
Collateral suspicion, else unknown. 
This truth escaped me not, and I confess, 
That having 'mid my native hills given loose 
To a schoolboy's vision, I had raised a pile 
Upon the basis of the coming time, 
That fell in ruins round me. Oh, what joy 
To see a sanctuary for our country's youth 
Informed with such a spirit as might be 
Its own protection ; a primeval grove, 
Where, though the shades with cheerfulness were 
filled, 
Nor indigent of songs warbled from crowds 
In under-coverts, yet the countenance 
Of the whole place should bear a stamp of awe ; 
A habitation sober and demure 
For ruminating creatures ; a domain 
For quiet things to wander in ; a haunt 
In which the heron should delight to feed 
By the shy rivers, and the pelican 
Upon the cypress spire in lonely thought 
Might sit and sun himself. — Alas ! Alas ! 
In vain for such solemnity I looked ; 
Mine eyes were crossed by butterflies, ears vfxed 
By chattering popinjays ; the inner heart 
Seemed trivial, and the impresses without 
Of a too gaudy region. 
Different sight 
Those venerable Doctors saw of old, 
When all who dwelt within these famous walla 
Led in abstemiousness a studious life ; 
When, in forlorn and naked chambers cooped 
And crowded, o'er the ponderous books they hung 
Like caterpillars eating out their way 
In silence, or with keen devouring noise 
Not to be tracked or fathered. Princes then 
At matins froze, and couched at curfew-time, 
Trained up through piety and zeal to prize 
Spare diet, patient labour, and plain weeds. 
seat of Arts ! renowned throughout the world ! 

RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE. 

 

Far different service in those homely days 
:The Muses' modest nurslings underwent 
From their first childhood : in that glorious time 
When Learning, like a stranger come from far, 
Sounding through Christian lands her trumpet, 
roused 
Peasant and king; when boys and youths, the 
growth 
Of ragged villages and crazy huts, 
Forsook their homes, and, errant in the quest 
iOf Patron, famous school or friendly nook, 
'Where, pensioned, they in shelter might sit down, 
Prom town to town and through wide scattered 
realms 
Journeyed with ponderous folios in their hands; 
And often, starting from some covert place, 
Saluted the chance comer on the road, 
•Crying, "An obolus, a penny give 
To a poor scholar ! " — when illustrious men, 
Lovers of truth, by penury constrained, 
Bucer, Erasmus, or Melancthon, read 
Before the doors or windows of their cells 
By moonshine through mere lack of taper light. 
j I But peace to vain regrets ! We see but darkly 
Even when we look behind us, and best things 
i Are not so pure by nature that they needs 
i Must keep to all, as fondly all believe, 
j Their highest promise. If the maiiner, 
I When at reluctant distance he hath passed 
Some tempting island, could but know the ills 
That must have fallen upon him had he brought 
;His bark to land upon the wished-for shore, 
Good cause would oft be his to thank the surf 
.Whose white belt scared him thence, or wind that 
blew 
nexorably adverse : for myself 
grieve not ; happy is the gowned youth, 
| Who only misses what I missed, who falls 
S r o lower than I fell. 
I did not love, 
ludging not ill perhaps, the timid course 
)f our scholastic studies ; could have wished 
|Co see the river flow with ampler range 
And freer pace; but more, far more, I grieved 
"o see displayed among an eager few, 
'Vho in the field of contest persevered, 
'assions unworthy of youth's generous heart 
>.nd mounting spirit, pitiably repaid, 
When so disturbed, whatever palms are won. 
[ rom these I turned to travel with the shoal 
j)f more unthinking natures, easy minds 
i-nd pillowy ; yet not wanting love that makes 
'he day pass lightly on, when foresight sleeps, 

And wisdom and the pledges interchanged 
With our own inner being are forgot. 
Yet was this deep vacation not given up 
To ntter waste. Hitherto I had stood 
In my own mind remote from social life, 
(At least from what we commonly so name,) 
Like a lone shepherd on a promontory 
Who lacking occupation looks far forth 
Into the boundless sea, and rather makes 
Than finds what he beholds. And sure it is, 
That this first transit from the smooth delights 
And wild outlandish walks of simple youth 
To something that resembles an approach 
Towards human business, to a privileged world 
Within a world, a midway residence 
With all its intervenient imagery, 
Did better suit my visionary mind, 
Far better, than to have been bolted forth, 
Thrust out abruptly into Fortune's way 
Among the conflicts of substantial life ; 
By a more just gradation did lead on 
To higher things ; more naturally matured, 
For permanent possession, better fruits, 
Whether of truth or virtue, to ensue. 
In serious mood, but oftener, I confess, 
With playful zest of fancy, did we note 
(How could we less ) the manners and the ways 
Of those who lived distinguished by the badge 
Of good or ill report ; or those with whom 
By frame of Academic discipline 
We were perforce connected, men whose sway 
And known authority of office served 
To set our minds on edge, and did no more. 
Nor wanted we rich pastime of this kind, 
Found everywhere, but chiefly in the ring 
Of the grave Elders, men unscoured, grotesque 
In character, tricked out like aged trees 
Which through the lapse of their infirmity 
Give ready place to any random seed 
That chooses to be reared upon their trunks. 
Here on my view, confronting vividly 
Those shepherd swains whom I had lately left, 
Appeared a different aspect of old age ; 
How different ! yet both distinctly marked, 
Objects embossed to catch the general eye, 
Or portraitures for special use designed, 
As some might seem, so aptly do they serve 
To illustrate Nature's book of rudiments — 
That book upheld as with maternal care 
When she would enter on her tender scheme 
Of teaching comprehension with delight, 
And mingling playful with pathetic thoughts. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

The surfaces of artificial life 
And manners finely wrought, the delicate race 
Of colours, lurking, gleaming up and down 
Through that state arras woven with silk and gold ; 
This wily interchange of snaky hues, 
Willingly or unwillingly revealed, 
I neither knew nor cared for ; and as such 
Were wanting here, I took what might be found 
Of less elaborate fabric. At this day 
I smile, in many a mountain solitude 
Conjuring up scenes as obsolete in freaks 
Of character, in points of wit as broad, 
As aught by wooden images performed 
For entertainment of the gaping crowd 
At wake or fair. And oftentimes do flit 
Remembrances before me of old men — 
Old humourists, who have been long in their 
graves, 
And having almost in my mind put off 
Their human names, have into phantoms passed 
Of texture midway between life and books. 
I play the loiterer : 'tis enough to note 
That here in dwarf proportions were expressed 
The limbs of the great world ; its eager strifes 
Collaterally pourtrayed, as in mock fight, 
A tournament of blows, some hardly dealt 
Though short of mortal combat ; and whate'er 
Might in this pageant be supposed to hit 
An artless rustic's notice, this way less, 
More that way, was not wasted upon me — 
And yet the spectacle may well demand 
A more substantial name, no mimic show, 
Itself a living part of a live whole, 
A creek in the vast sea ; for, all degrees 
And shapes of spurious fame and short-lived praise 
Here sate in state, and fed with daily alms 
Retainers won away from solid good ; 
And here was Labour, his own bond-slave ; Hope, 

That never set the pains against the prize ; 
Idleness halting with his weary clog, 
And poor misguided Shame, and witless Fear 
And simple Pleasure foraging for Death ; 
Honour misplaced, and Dignity astray ; 
Feuds, factions, flatteries, enmity, and guile 
Murmuring submission, and bald government, 
(The idol weak as the idolator), 
And Decency and Custom starving Truth, 
And blind Authority beating with his staff 
The child that might have led him ; Emptiness 
Followed as of good omen, and meek Worth 
Left to herself unheard of and unknown. 
Of these and other kindred notices 
I cannot say what portion is in truth 
'The naked recollection of that time, 
And what may rather have been called to life 
By after-meditation. But delight 
That, in an easy temper lulled asleep, 
Is still with Innocence its own reward, 
This was not wanting. Carelessly I roamed 
As through a wide museum from whose stores 
A casual rarity is singled out 
And has its brief perusal, then gives way 
To others, all supplanted in their turn ; 
Till 'mid this crowded neighbourhood of things 
That are by nature most unneighbourly, 
The head turns round and cannot right itself ; 
And though an aching and a barren sense 
Of gay confusion still be uppermost, 
With few wise longings and but little love, 
Yet to the memory something cleaves at last, 
Whence profit may be drawn in times to come. 
Thus in submissive idleness, my Friend ! 
The labouring time of autumn, winter, spring, 
Eight months ! rolled pleasingly away ; the ninth 
Came and returned me to my native hills. 



SUMMER VACATION. 

 

BOOK FOURTH. 

SUMMER VACATION. 

Bright was the summer's noon when quickening 
steps 
followed each other till a dreary moor 
Yas crossed, a bare ridge clonib, upon whose top 
Standing alone, as from a rampart's edge, 
overlooked the bed of Windermere, 
jike a vast river, stretching in the sun. 
Yith exultation, at my feet I saw 
jake, islands, promontories, gleaming bays, 
L universe of Nature's fairest forms 
'roudly revealed with instantaneous burst, 
lagnificent, and beautiful, and gay. 
bounded down the hill shouting amain 
'or the old Ferryman ; to the shout the rocks 
Replied, and when the Charon of the flood 
lad staid his oars, and touched the jutting pier, 
did not step into the well-known boat 
Vithout a cordial greeting. Thence with speed 
r p the familiar hill I took my way 
owards that sweet Valley where I had been 
reared ; 
"was but a short hour's walk, ere veering round 
saw the snow-white church upon her hill 
it like a throned Lady, sending out; 
gracious look all over her domain, 
on azure smoke betrays the lurking town ; 
,  ith eager footsteps I advance and reach 
he cottage threshold where my journey closed, 
lad welcome had I, with some tears, perhaps, 
rom my old Dame, so kind and motherly, 
Tiile she perused me with a parent's pride, 
he thoughts of gratitude shall fall like dew 
pon thy grave, good creature ! While my heart 
in beat never will I forget thy name. 
eaven's blessing be upon thee where thou liest 
|fter thy innocent and busy stir 
narrow cares, thy little daily growth 
: calm enj oyments, after eighty years, 
id more than eighty, of untroubled life, 
lildless, yet by the strangers to thy blood 
onoured with little less than filial love. 
hat joy was mine to see thee once again, 
iee and thy dwelling, and a crowd of things 
i^out its narrow precincts all beloved, 

 Hawkshead. — Ed. 

And many of them seeming yet my own ! 
Why should I speak of what a thousand hearts 
Have felt, and every man alive can guess ? 
The rooms, the court, the garden were not left 
Long unsaluted, nor the sunny seat 
Round the stone table under the dark pine, 
Friendly to studious or to festive hours ; 
Nor that unruly child of mountain birth, 
The famous brook, who, soon as he was boxed 
Within our garden, found himself at once, 
As if by trick insidious and unkind, 
Stripped of his voice and left to dimple down 
(Without an effort and without a will) 
A channel paved by man's officious care. 
I looked at him and smiled, and smiled again, 
And in the press of twenty thousand thoughts, 
"Ha," quoth I, "pretty prisoner, are you there!' 
Well might sarcastic Fancy then have whispered, 
" An emblem here behold of thy own life ; 
In its late course of even days with all 
Their smooth enthralment ;" but the heart was full, 
Too full for that reproach. My aged Dame 
Walked proudly at my side : she guided me ; 
I willing, nay — nay, wishing to be led. 
— The face of every neighbour whom I met 
Was like a volume to me ; some were hailed 
Upon the road, some busy at their work, 
Unceremonious greetings interchanged 
With half the length of a long field between. 
Among my schoolfellows I scattered round 
Like recognitions, but with some constraint 
Attended, doubtless, with a little pride, 
But with more shame, for my habiliments, 
The transformation wrought by gay attire. 
Not less delighted did I take my place 
At our domestic table : and, dear Friend ! 
In this endeavour simply to relate 
A Poet's history, may I leave untold 
The thankfulness with which I laid me down 
In my accustomed bed, more welcome now 
Perhaps than if it had been more desired 
Or been more often thought of with regret ; 
That lowly bed whence I had heard the wind 
Roar, and the rain beat hard ; where I so oft 
Had lain awake on summer nights to watch 
The moon in splendour couched among the leaves 
Of a tall ash, that near our cottage stood ; 
Had watched her with fixed eyes while to and fro 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

In the dark summit of the waving tree 
She rocked with every impulse of the breeze. 
Among the favourites whom it pleased me well 
To see again, was one by ancient right 
Our inmate, a rough terrier of the hills ; 
By birth and call of nature pre-ordained 
To hunt the badger and unearth the fox 
Among the impervious crags, but having been 
From youth our own adopted, he had passed 
Into a gentler service. And when first 
The boyish spirit nagged, and day by day 
Along my veins I kindled with the stir, 
The fermentation, and the vernal heat 
Of poesy, affecting private shades 
Like a sick Lover, then this dog was used 
To watch me, an attendant and a friend, 
Obsequious to my steps early and late, 
Though often of such dilatory walk 
Tired, and uneasy at the halts I made. 
A hundred times when, roving high and low, 
I have been harassed with the toil of verse, 
Much pains and little progress, and at once 
Some lovely Image in the song rose up 
Full-formed, like Venus rising from the sea ; 
Then have I darted forwards to let loose 
My hand upon his back with stormy joy, 
Caressing him again and yet again. 
And when at evening on the public way 
I sauntered, like a river murmuring 
And talking to itself when all things else 
Are still, the creature trotted on before ; 
Such was his custom; but whene'er he met 
A passenger approaching, he would turn 
To give me timely notice, and straightway, 
Grateful for that admonishment, I hushed 
My voice, composed my gait, and, with the air 
And mien of one whose thoughts are free, advanced 
To give and take a greeting that might save 
My name from piteous rumours, such as wait 
On men suspected to be crazed in brain. 
Those walks well worthy to be prized and 
loved — 
Regretted ! — that word, too, was on my tongue, 
But they were richly laden with all good, 
And cannot be remembered but with thanks 
And gratitude, and perfect joy of heart — 
Those walks in all their freshness now came back 
Like a returning Spring. When first I made 
Once more the circuit of our little lake, 
If ever happiness hath lodged with man, 
That day consummate happiness was mine, 
Wide-spreading, steady, calm, contemplative. 

The sun was set, or setting, when I left 
Our cottage door, and evening soon brought on 
A sober hour, not winning or serene, 
For cold and raw the air was, and untuned 
But as a face we love is sweetest then 
When sori'ow damps it, or, whatever look 
It chance to wear, is sweetest if the heart 
Have fulness in herself; even so with me 
It fared that evening. Gently did my soul 
Put off her veil, and, self-transmuted, stood 
Naked, as in the presence of her God. 
While on I walked, a comfort seemed to touch 
A heart that had not been disconsolate : 
Strength came where weakness was not know 
to be, 
At least not felt ; and restoration came 
Like an intruder knocking at the door 
Of unacknowledged weariness. I took 
The balance, and with firm hand weighed mysel 
— Of that external scene which round me lay, 
Little, in this abstraction, did I see ; 
Remembered less ; but I had inward hopes 
And swellings of the spirit, was rapt and soothed 
Conversed with promises, had glimmering views 
How life pervades the undecaying mind ; 
How the immortal soul with God-like power 
Informs, creates, and thaws the deepest sleep 
That time can lay upon her ; how on earth, 
Man, if he do but live within the light 
Of high endeavours, daily spreads abroad 
His being armed with strength that cannot fail. 
Nor was there want of milder thoughts, of love 
Of innocence, and holiday repose ; 
And more than pastoral quiet, 'mid the stir 
Of boldest projects, and a peaceful end 
At last, or glorious, by endurance won. 
Thus musing, in a wood I sate me down 
Alone, continuing there to muse : the slopes 
And heights meanwhile were slowly overspread 
With darkness, and before a rippling breeze 
The long lake lengthened out its hoary line, 
And in the sheltered coppice where I sate, 
Around me from among the hazel leaves, 
Now here, now there, moved by the stragglm 
wind, 
Came ever and anon a breath-like sound, 
Quick as the pantings of the faithful dog, 
The off and on companion of my walk ; 
And such, at times, believing them to be, 
I turned my head to look if he were there ; 
Then into solemn thought I passed once more. 
A freshness also found I at this time 
In human Life, the daily life of those 



SUMMER VACATION. 

 

Whose occupations really I loved ; 
The peaceful scene oft filled me with surprise 
Changed like a garden in the heat of spring 
After an eight-days' absence. Eor Cto omit 
The things which were the same and yet appeared 
Far otherwise) amid this rural solitude, 
A. narrow Vale where each was known to all, 
'Twas not indifferent to a youthful mind 
To mark some sheltering bower or sunny nook, 
[Where an old man had used to sit alone, 
Now vacant ; pale-faced babes whom I had left 
In arms, now rosy prattlers at the feet 
; Of a pleased grandame tottering up and down ; 
.And growing girls whose beauty, filched away 
With all its pleasant promises, was gone 
To deck some slighted playmate's homely cheek. 
i Yes, I had something of a subtler sense, 
And often looking round was moved to smiles 
Such as a delicate work of humour breeds ; 
I read, without design, the opinions, thoughts, 
Of those plain-living people now observed 
With clearer knowledge ; with another eye 
il saw the quiet woodman in the woods, 
The shepherd roam the hills. With new delight, 
IThis chiefly, did I note my grey-haired Dame ; 
jSaw her go forth to church or other work 
,f state equipped in monumental trim ; 
Short velvet cloak, (her bonnet of the like), 
A mantle such as Spanish Cavaliers 
Wore in old time. Her smooth domestic life, 
Affectionate without disquietude, 
[Her talk, her business, pleased me ; and no less 
'Her clear though shallow stream of piety 
,That ran on Sabbath days a fresher course ; 
With thoughts unfelt till now I saw her read 
iHer Bible on hot Sunday afternoons, 
And loved the book, when she had dropped asleep 
And made of it a pillow for her head. 
J Nor less do I remember to have felt, 
(Distinctly manifested at this time, 
A human-heartedness about my love 
por objects hitherto the absolute wealth 
; Of my own private being and no more ; 
Which I had loved, even as a blessed spirit 
Or Angel, if he were to dwell on earth, 
'Might love in individual happiness. 
But now there opened on me other thoughts 
Of change, congratulation or regret, 
[A pensive feeling ! It spread far and wide ; 
(The trees, the mountains shared it, and the brooks, 
The stars of Heaven, now seen in their old 
haunts — 

White Sirius glittering o'er the southern crags, 
Orion with his belt, and those fair Seven, 
Acquaintances of every little child, 
And Jupiter, my own beloved star ! 
Whatever shadings of mortality, 
Whatever imports from the world of death 
Had come among these objects heretofore, 
Were, in the main, of mood less tender : strong, 
Deep, gloomy were they, and severe; the scat- 
terings 
Of awe or tremulous dread, that had given way 
In later youth to yearnings of a love 
Enthusiastic, to delight and hope. 
As one who hangs down-bending from the side 
Of a slow-moving boat, upon the breast 
Of a still water, solacing himself 
With such discoveries as his eye can make 
Beneath him in the bottom of the deep, 
Sees many beauteous sights — weeds, fishes, flowers, 
Grots, pebbles, roots of trees, and fancies more, 
Yet often is perplexed, and cannot part 
The shadow from the substance, rocks and sky, 
Mountains and clouds, reflected in the depth 
Of the clear flood, from things which there abide 
In their true dwelling ; now is crossed by gleam 
Of his own image, by a sun-beam now, 
And wavering motions sent he knows not whence, 
Impediments that make his task more sweet ; 
Such pleasant office have we long pursued 
Incumbent o'er the surface of past time 
With like success, nor often have appeared 
Shapes fairer or less doubtfully discerned 
Than these to which the Tale, indulgent Friend! 
Would now direct thy notice. Yet in spite 
Of pleasure won, and knowledge not withheld, 
There was an inner falling off — I loved, 
Loved deeply all that had been loved before, 
More deeply even than ever: but a swarm 
Of heady schemes jostling each other, gawds, 
And feast and dance, and public revelry, 
And sports and games (too grateful in themselves, 
Yet in themselves less grateful, I believe, 
Than as they were a badge glossy and fresh 
Of manliness and freedom) all conspired 
To lure my mind from firm habitual quest 
Of feeding pleasures, to depress the zeal 
And damp those yearnings which had once been 
mine — 
A wild, unworldly-minded youth, given up 
To his own eager thoughts. It would demand 
Some skill, and longer time than may be spared 
To paint these vanities, and how they wrought 
In haunts where they, till now, had been unknown. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

It seemed the very garments that I wore 
Preyed on my strength, and stopped the quiet 
stream 
Of self-forgetfulness. 
Yes, that heartless chase 
Of trivial pleasures was a poor exchange 
For books and nature at that early age. 
'Tis true, some casual knowledge might be gained 
Of character or life ; but at that time, 
Of manners put to school I took small note, 
And all my deeper passions lay elsewhere. 
Far better had it been to exalt the mind 
By solitary study, to uphold 
Intense desire through meditative peace ; 
And yet, for chastisement of these regrets, 
The memory of one particular hour 
Doth here rise up against me. 'Mid a throng 
Of maids and youths, old men, and matrons staid, 
A medley of all tempers, I had passed 
The night in dancing, gaiety, and mirth, 
With din of instruments and shuffling feet, 
And glancing forms, and tapers glittering, 
And unaimed prattle flying up and down ; 
Spirits upon the stretch, and here and there 
Slight shocks of young love-liking interspersed, 
Whose transient pleasure mounted to the head, 
And tingled through the veins. Ere we retired, 
The cock had crowed, and now the eastern sky 
Was kindling, not unseen, from humble copse 
And open field, through which the pathway wound, 
And homeward led my steps. Magnificent 
The morning rose, in memorable pomp, 
Glorious as e'er I had beheld — in front, 
The sea lay laughing at a distance ; near, 
The solid mountains shone, bright as the clouds, 
Grain-tinctured, drenched in empyrean light ; 
And in the meadows and the lower grounds 
Was all the sweetness of a common dawn — 
Dews, vapours, and the melody of birds, 
And labourers going forth to till the fields. 
Ah ! need I say, dear Friend ! that to the brim 
My heart was full ; I made no vows, but vows 
Were then made for me ; bond unknown to me 
Was given, that I should be, else sinning greatly, 
A dedicated Spirit. On I walked 
In thankful blessedness, which yet survives. 
Strange rendezvous ! My mind was at that time 
A parti-coloured show of grave and gay, 
Solid and light, short-sighted and profound ; 
Of inconsiderate habits and sedate, 
Consorting in one mansion unreproved. 
The worth I knew of powers that I possessed, 
Though slighted and too oft misused. Besides, 

That summer, swarming as it did with thoughts 
Transient and idle, lacked not intervals 
When Folly from the frown of fleeting Time 
Shrunk, and the mind experienced in herself 
Conformity as just as that of old 
To the end and written spirit of God's works, 
Whether held forth in Nature or in Man, 
Through pregnant vision, separate or conjoined. 
When from our better selves we have too long 
Been parted by the hurrying world, and droop, 
Sick of its business, of its pleasures tired, 
How gracious, how benign, is Solitude ; 
How potent a mere image of her sway ; 
Most potent when impressed upon the mind 
With an appropriate human centre — hermit, 
Deep in the bosom of the wilderness ; 
Votary (in vast cathedral, where no foot 
Is treading, where no other face is seen) 
Kneeling at prayers ; or watchman on the top 
Of lighthouse, beaten by Atlantic waves ; 
Or as the soul of that great Power is met 
Sometimes embodied on a public road, 
When, for the night deserted, it assumes 
A character of quiet more profound 
Than pathless wastes. 
Once, when those summer months 
Were flown, and autumn brought its annual show 
Of oars with oars contending, sails with sails, 
Upon Winander's spacious breast, it chanced 
That — after I had left a flower-decked room 
(Whose in-door pastime, lighted up, survived 
To a late hour), and spirits overwrought 
Were making night do penance for a day 
Spent in a round of strenuous idleness — 
My homeward course led up a long ascent, 
Where the road's watery surface, to the top 
Of that sharp rising, glittered to the moon 
And bore the semblance of another stream 
Stealing with silent lapse to join the brook 
That murmured in the vale. All else was still ; 
No living thing appeared in earth or air, 
And, save the flowing water's peaceful voice, 
Sound there was none— but, lo ! an uncouth shape, 
Shown by a sudden turning of the road, 
So near that, slipping back into the shade 
Of a thick hawthorn, I could mark him well,. 
Myself unseen. He was of stature tall, 
A span above man's common measure, tall, 
Stiff, lank, and upright ; a more meagre man 
Was never seen before by night or day. 
Long were his arms, pallid his hands ; his mouth 
Looked ghastly in the moonlight : from behind, 
A mile-stone propped him ; I could also ken 



BOOKS. 

 

That he was clothed in military garb, 
Though faded, yet entire. Companionless, 
No dog attending, by no staff sustained, 
He stood, and in his very dress appeared 
A desolation, a simplicity, 
To which the trappings of a gaudy world 
Make a strange back-ground. From his lips, ere 
long, 
Issued low muttered sounds, as if of pain 
Or some uneasy thought ; yet still his form 
Kept the same awful steadiness — at his feet 
His shadow lay, and moved not. From self-blame 
Not wholly free, I watched him thus ; at length 
Subduing my heart's specious cowardice, 
I left the shady nook where I had stood 
And hailed him. Slowly from his resting-place 
He rose, and with a lean and wasted arm 
■ In measured gesture lifted to his head 
Returned my salutation ; then resumed 
His station as before ; and when I asked 
His history, the veteran, in reply, 
Was neither slow nor eager ; but, unmoved, 
j And with a quiet uncomplaining voice, 
A stately air of mild indifference, 
He told in few plain words a soldier's tale— 
, That in the Tropic Islands he had served, 
Whence he had landed scarcely three weeks past ; 
That on his landing he had been dismissed, 
And now was travelling towards his native home. 
, This heard, I said, in pity, " Come with me." 
j He stooped, and straightway from the ground 
took up 
An oaken staff by me yet unobserved — 
 A staff which must have dropped from his slack 
hand 
And lay till now neglected in the grass. 
Though weak his step and cautious, he appeared 
To travel without pain, and I beheld, 

With an astonishment but ill suppressed, 
His ghostly figure moving at my side : 
Nor could I, while we journeyed thus, forbear 
To turn from present hardships to the past, 
And speak of war, battle, and pestilence, 
Sprinkling this talk with questions, better spared, 
On what he might himself have seen or felt. 
He all the while was in demeanour calm, 
Concise in answer ; solemn and sublime 
He might have seemed, but that in all he said 
There was a strange half-absence, as of one 
Knowing too well the importance of his theme, 
But feeling it no longer. Our discourse 
Soon ended, and together on we passed 
In silence through a wood gloomy and still. 
Up-turning, then, along an open field, 
We reached a cottage. At the door I knocked, 
And earnestly to charitable care 
Commended him as a poor friendless man, 
Belated and by sickness overcome. 
Assured that now the traveller would repose 
In comfort, I entreated that henceforth 
He would not linger in the public ways, 
But ask for timely furtherance and help 
Such as his state required. At this reproof, 
With the same ghastly mildness in his look, 
He said, " My trust is in the God of Heaven, 
And in the eye of him who passes me ! " 
The cottage door was speedily unbarred, 
And now the soldier touched his hat once more 
With his lean hand, and in a faltering voice, 
Whose tone bespake reviving interests 
Till then unfelt, he thanked me ; I returned 
The farewell blessing of the patient man, 
And so we parted. Back I cast a look, 
And lingered near the door a little space, 
Then sought with quiet heart my distant home. 

BOOK FIFTH. 

BOOKS. 

When Contemplation, like the night-calm felt 
' Through earth and sky, spreads widely, and sends 
deep 
 Into the soul its tranquillising power, 
j Even then I sometimes grieve for thee, Man, 
Earth's paramount Creature ! not so much for woes 

That thou endurest; heavy though that weight be, 
Cloud-like it mounts, or touched with light divine 
Doth melt away ; but for those palms achieved, 
Through length of time, by patient exercise 
Of study and hard thought ; there, there, it is 
That sadness finds its fuel. Hitherto, 
In progress through this Verse, my mind hath 
looked 
h h  

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Upon the speaking face of earth and heaven 
As her prime teacher, intercourse with man 
Established by the sovereign Intellect, 
"Who through that bodily image hath diffused, 
As might appear to the eye of fleeting time, 
A deathless spirit. Thou also, man ! hast wrought, 
For commerce of thy nature with herself, 
Things that aspire to unconquerable life ; 
And yet we feel — we cannot choose but feel — 
That they must perish. Tremblings of the heart 
It gives, to think that our immortal being 
No more shall need such garments ; and yet man, 
As long as he shall be the child of earth, 
Might almost " weep to have " what he may lose, 
Nor be himself extinguished, but survive, 
Abject, depressed, forlorn, disconsolate. 
A thought is with me sometimes, and I say, — 
Should the whole frame of earth by inward throes 
Be wrenched, or fire come down from far to scorch 
Her pleasant habitations, and dry up 
Old Ocean, in his bed left singed and bare, 
Yet would the living Presence still subsist 
Victorious, and composure would ensue, 
And kindlings like the morning — presage sure 
Of day returning and of life revived. 
But all the meditations of mankind, 
Yea, all the adamantine holds of truth 
By reason built, or passion, which itself 
Is highest reason in a soul sublime ; 
The consecrated works of Bard and Sage, 
Sensuous or intellectual, wrought by men, 
Twin labourers and heirs of the same hopes ; 
Where would they be ] Oh ! why hath not the 
Mind 
Some element to stamp her image on 
In nature somewhat nearer to her own ? 
Why, gifted with such powers to send abroad 
Her spirit, must it lodge in shrines so frail ] 
One day, when from my lips a like complaint 
Had fallen in presence of a studious friend, 
He with a smile made answer, that in truth 
'Twas going far to seek disquietude : 
But on the front of his reproof confessed 
That he himself had oftentimes given way 
To kindred hauntings. Whereupon I told, 
That once in the stillness of a summer's noon, 
While I was seated in a rocky cave 
By the sea-side, perusing, so it chanced, 
The famous history of the errant knight 
Recorded by Cervantes, these same thoughts 
Beset me, and to height unusual rose, 
While listlessly I sate, and, having closed 
The book, had turned my eyes toward the wide sea. 

On poetry and geometric truth, 
And their high privilege of lasting life, 
From all internal injury exempt, 
I mused ; upon these chiefly : and at length, 
My senses yielding to the sultry air, 
Sleep seized me, and I passed into a dream. 
I saw before me stretched a boundless plain 
Of sandy wilderness, all black and void, 
And as I looked around, distress and fear 
Came creeping over me, when at my side, 
Close at my side, an uncouth shape appeared 
Upon a dromedary, mounted high. 
He seemed an Arab of the Bedouin tribes : 
A lance he bore, and underneath one arm 
A stone, and in the opposite hand a shell 
Of a surpassing brightness. At the sight 
Much I rejoiced, not doubting but a guide 
Was present, one who with unerring skill 
Would through the desert lead me; and while yet 
I looked and looked, self-questioned what this 
freight 
Which the new comer carried through the waste 
Could mean, the Arab told me that the stone 
(To give it in the language of the dream) 
Was "Euclid's Elements; " and "This," said he, 
" Is something of more worth ; " and at the worn 
Stretched forth the shell, so beautiful in shape, 
In colour so resplendent, with command 
That I should hold it to my ear. I did so, 
And heard that instant in an unknown tongue, 
Which yet I understood, articulate sounds, 
A loud prophetic blast of harmony ; 
An Ode, in passion uttered, which foretold 
Destruction to the children of the earth 
By deluge, now at hand. No sooner ceased 
The song, than the Arab with calm look declared 
That all would come to pass of which the voice 
Had given forewarning, and that he himself 
Was going then to bury those two books : 
The one that held acquaintance with the stars, 
And wedded soul to soul in purest bond 
Of reason, undisturbed by space or time; 
The other that was a god, yea many gods, 
Had voices more than all the winds, with power 
To exhilarate the spirit, and to soothe, 
Through every clime, the heart of human kind. 
While this was uttering, strange as it may seem, 
I wondered not, although I plainly saw 
The one to be a stone, the other a shell ; 
Nor doubted once but that they both were books, 
Having a perfect faith in all that passed. 
Far stronger, now, grew the desire I felt 
To cleave unto this man ; but when I prayed 
To share his enterprise, he hurried on 

BOOKS. 

 

Reckless of me : I followed, not unseen, 
IFor oftentimes he cast a backward look, 
: Grasping his twofold treasure. — Lance in rest, 
iHe rode, I keeping pace with him ; and now 
He, to my fancy, had become the knight 
Whose tale Cervantes tells ; yet not the knight, 
But was an Arab of the desert too ; 
Of these was neither, and was both at once. 
His countenance, meanwhile, grewmore disturbed; 
:And,looking backwards when he looked, mine eyes 
Saw, over half the wilderness diffused, 
A bed of glittering light : I asked the cause : 
" It is," said he, "the waters of the deep 
: Gathering upon us; " quickening then the pace 
Of the unwieldy creature he bestrode, 
He left me : I called after him aloud ; 
He heeded not ; but, with his twofold charge 
Still in his grasp, before me, full in view, 
Went hurrying o'er the illimitable waste, 
With the fleet waters of a drowning world 
'In chase of him ; whereat I waked in terror, 
|And saw the sea before me, and the book, 
lln which I had been reading, at my side. 
Full often, taking from the world of sleep 
'This Arab phantom, which I thus beheld, 
This semi-Quixote, I to him have given 
A substance, fancied him a living man, 
A gentle dweller in the desert, crazed 
By love and feeling, and internal thought 
j Protracted among endless solitudes ; 
j.Have shaped him wandering upon this quest ! 
'iNor have I pitied him ; but rather felt 
' Reverence was due to a being thus employed ; 
iAnd thought that, in the blind and awful lair 
[Of such a madness, reason did lie couched. 
Enow there are on earth to take in charge 
Their wives, their children, and their virgin loves, 
I'Or whatsoever else the heart holds dear ; 
| Enow to stir for these ; yea, will I say, 
Contemplating in soberness the approach 
Of an event so dire, by signs in earth 
|r heaven made manifest, that I could share 
That maniac's fond anxiety, and go 
Upon like errand. Oftentimes at least 
Me hath such strong entrancement overcome, 
When I have held a volume in my hand, 
Poor earthly casket of immortal verse, 
Shakespeare, or Milton, labourers divine ! 
i 
I Great and benign, indeed, must be the power 
Of living nature, which could thus so long 
jDetain me from the best of other guides 
And dearest helpers, left unthanked, unpraised, 

Even in the time of lisping infancy ; 
And later down, in prattling childhood even, 
While I was travelling back among those days, 
How could I ever play an ingrate's part ] 
Once more should I have made those bowers 
resound, 
By intermingling strains of thankfulness 
With their own thoughtless melodies ; at least 
It might have well beseemed me to repeat 
Some simply fashioned tale, to tell again, 
In slender accents of sweet verse, some tale 
That did bewitch me then, and soothes me now. 
O Friend ! Poet ! brother of my soul, 
Think not that I could pass along untouched 
By these remembrances. Yet wherefore speak? 
Why call upon a few weak words to say 
What is already written in the hearts 
Of all that breathe  — what in the path of all 
Drops daily from the tongue of every child, 
Wherever man is found ? The trickling tear 
Upon the cheek of listening Infancy 
Proclaims it, and the insuperable look 
That drinks as if it never could be full. 
That portion of my story I shall leave 
There registered : whatever else of power 
Or pleasure sown, or fostered thus, may be 
Peculiar to myself, let that remain 
Where still it works, though hidden from all 
search 
Among the depths of time. Yet is it just 
That here, in memory of all books which lay 
Their sure foundations in the heart of man, 
Whether by native prose, or numerous verse, 
That in the name of all inspired souls — 
From Homer the great Thunderer, from the voice 
That roars along the bed of Jewish song, 
And that more varied and elaborate, 
Those trumpet-tones of harmony that shake 
Our shores in England, — from those loftiest notes 
Down to the low and wren-bike warblings, made 
For cottagers and spinners at the wheel. 
And sun-burnt travellers resting their tired limbs, 
Stretched under wayside hedge-rows, ballad tunes, 
Food for the hungry ears of little ones, 
And of old men who have survived their joys — 
'Tis just that in behalf of these, the works, 
And of the men that framed them, whether known 
Or sleeping nameless in their scattered graves, 
That I should here assert their rights, attest 
Their honours, and should, once for all, pronounce 
Their benediction ; speak of them as Powers 
For ever to be hallowed ; only less, 
For what we are and what we may become, 

 

THE PRELUDE. 


Than Nature's self, which is the breath of God, 
Or His pure Word by miracle revealed. 
Karely and with reluctance would I stoop 
To transitory themes ; yet I rejoice, 
And, by these thoughts admonished, will pour out 
Thanks with uplifted heart, that I was reared 
Safe from an evil which these days have laid 
Upon the children of the land, a pest 
That might have dried me up, body and soul. 
This verse is dedicate to Nature's self, 
And things that teach as Nature teaches : then, 
Oh ! where had been the Man, the Poet where, 
Where had we been, we two, beloved Friend ! 
If in the season of unperilous choice, 
In lieu of wandering, as we did, through vales 
Rich with indigenous produce, open ground 
Of Fancy, happy pastures ranged at will, 
Wehadbeenfollowed,hourly watched, andnoosed, 
Each in his several melancholy walk 
Stringed like a poor man's heifer at its feed, 
Led through the lanes in forlorn servitude ; 
Or rather like a stalled ox debarred 
From touch of growing grass, that may not taste 
A flower till it have yielded up its sweets 
A prelibation to the mower's scythe. 
Behold the parent hen amid her brood, 
Though fledged and feathered, and well pleased 
to part 
And straggle from her presence, still a brood, 
And she herself from the maternal bond 
Still undischarged ; yet doth she little more 
Than move with them in tenderness and love, 
A centre to the circle which they make ; 
And now and then, alike from need of theirs 
And call of her own natural appetites, 
She scratches, ransacks up the earth for food, 
Which they partake at pleasure. Early died 
My honoured Mother, she who was the heart 
And hinge of all our learnings and our loves: 
She left us destitute, and, as we might, 
Trooping together. Little suits it me 
To break upon the sabbath of her rest 
With any thought that looks at others' blame ; 
Nor would I praise her but in perfect love. 
Hence am I checked: but let me boldly say, 
In gratitude, and for the sake of truth, 
Unheard by her, that she, not falsely taught, 
Fetching her goodness rather from times past, 
Than shaping novelties for times to come, 
Had no presumption, no such jealousy, 
Nor did by habit of her thoughts mistrust 
Our nature, but had virtual faith that He 

Who fills the mother's breast with innocent milk 
Doth also for our nobler part provide, 
Under His great correction and control, 
As innocent instincts, and as innocent food ; 
Or draws for minds that are left free to trust 
In the simplicities of opening life 
Sweet honey out of spurned or dreaded weeds. 
This was her creed, and therefore she was pure 
From anxious fear of error or mishap, 
And evil, overweeningly so called ; 
Was not puffed up by false unnatural hopes, 
Nor selfish with unnecessary cares, 
Nor with impatience from the season asked 
More than its timely produce ; rather loved 
The hours for what they are, than from regard 
Glanced on their promises in restless pride. 
Such was she — not from faculties more strong 
Than others have, but from the times, perhaps, 
And spot in which she lived, and through a grace 
Of modest meekness, simple-mindedness, 
A heart that found benignity and hope, 
Being itself benign. 
My drift I fear 
Is scarcely obvious ; but, that common sense 
May try this modern system by its fruits, 
Leave let me take to place before her sight 
A specimen pourtrayed with faithful hand. 
Full early trained to worship seemliness, 
This model of a child is never known 
To mix in quarrels ; that were far beneath 
Its dignity; with gifts he bubbles o'er 
As generous as a fountain ; selfishness 
May not come near him, nor the little throng 
Of flitting pleasures tempt him from his path ; 
The wandering beggars propagate his name, 
Dumb creatures find him tender as a nun, 
And natural or supernatural fear, 
Unless it leap upon him in a dream, 
Touches him not. To enhance the wonder, see 
How arch his notices, how nice his sense 
Of the ridiculous ; not blind is he 
To the broad follies of the licensed world, 
Yet innocent himself withal, though shrewd, 
And can read lectures upon innocence ; 
A miracle of scientific lore, 
Ships he can guide across the pathless sea, 
And tell you all their cunning ; he can read 
The inside of the earth, and spell the stars ; 
He knows the policies of foreign lands ; 
Can string you names of districts, cities, towns, 
The whole world over, tight as beads of dew 
Upon a gossamer thread ; he sifts, he weighs ; 
All things are put to question ; he must live 
Knowing that he grows wiser every day 

BOOKS. 

 

Dr else not live at all, and seeing too 
gach little drop of wisdom as it falls 
Into the dimpling cistern of his heart : 
|?or this unnatural growth the trainer blame, 
Pity the tree. — Poor human vanity, 
Wert thou extinguished, little would be left 
'iVhich he could truly love ; but how escape ? 
;?or, ever as a thought of purer birth 
'lisea to lead him toward a better clime, 
liome intermeddler still is on the watch 
jPo drive him back, and pound him, like a stray, 
I Within the pinfold of his own conceit. 
itleanwhile old grandame earth is grieved to find 
iPhe playthings, which her love designed for him, 
Jnthought of: in their woodland beds the flowers 
Veep, and the river sides are all forlorn. 
)h ! give us once again the wishing cap 
!)f Portunatus, and the invisible coat 
)f Jack the Giant-killer, Robin Hood, 
Ind Sabra in the forest with St. George ! 
fhe child, whose love is here, at least, doth reap 
pne precious gain, that he forgets himself. 
These mighty workmen of our later age, 
Yho, with a broad highway, have overbridged 
?he froward chaos of futurity, 
Tamed to their bidding ; they who have the skill 
To manage books, and things, and make them act 
,n infant minds as surely as the sun 
peals with a flower ; the keepers of our time, 
jChe guides and wardens of our faculties, 
jJages who in their prescience would control 
lUl accidents, and to the very road 
iiVhich they have fashioned would confine us down, 
jjike engines ; when will their presumption learn, 
That in the unreasoning progress of the world 
&. wiser spirit is at work for us, 
&. better eye than theirs, most prodigal 
Df blessings, and most studious of our good, 
|ven in what seem our most unfruitful hours ? 
[ There was a Boy : ye knew him well, ye cliffs 
|lnd islands of Winander ! — many a time 
jit evening, when the earliest stars began 
to move along the edges of the hills, 
Using or setting, would he stand alone 
j'eneath the trees or by the glimmering lake, 
Ind there, with fingers interwoven, both hands 
pressed closely palm to palm, and to his mouth 
|Jplifted, he, as through an instrument, 
|ew mimic hootings to the silent owls, 
phat they might answer him; and they would shout 

See p. .— Ed. 

Across the watery vale, and shout again, 
Responsive to his call, with quivering peals, 
And long halloos and screams, and echoes loud, 
Redoubled and redoubled, concourse wild 
Of jocund din ; and, when a lengthened pause 
Of silence came and baffled his best skill, 
Then sometimes, in that silence while he hung 
Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise 
Has carried far into his heart the voice 
Of mountain torrents ; or the visible scene 
Would enter unawares into his mind, 
"With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, 
Its woods, and that uncertain heaven, received 
Into the bosom of the steady lake. 
This Boy was taken from his mates, and died 
In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old. 
Fair is the spot, most beautiful the vale 
Where he was born ; the grassy churchyard hangs 
Upon a slope above the village school, 
And through that churchyard when my way has 
led 
On summer evenings, I believe that there 
A long half hour together I have stood 
Mute, looking at the grave in which he lies ! 
Even now appears before the mind's clear eye 
That self-same village church ; I see her sit 
(The throned Lady whom erewhile we hailed) 
On her green hill, forgetful of this Boy 
Who slumbers at her feet, — forgetful, too, 
Of all her silent neighbourhood of graves, 
And listening only to the gladsome sounds 
That, from the rural school ascending, play 
Beneath her and about her. May she long 
Behold a race of young ones like to those 
With whom I herded !— (easily, indeed, 
We might have fed upon a fatter soil 
Of arts and letters — but be that forgiven) — 
A race of real children ; not too wise, 
Too learned, or too good ; but wanton, fresh, 
And bandied up and down by love and hate ; 
Not unresentful where self-justified; 
Fierce, moody, patient, venturous, modest, shy ; 
Mad at their sports like withered leaves in winds ; 
Though doing wrong and suffering, and full oft 
Bending beneath our life's mysterious weight 
Of pain, and doubt, and fear, yet yielding not 
In happiness to the happiest upon earth. 
Simplicity in habit, truth in speech, 
Be these the daily strengtheners of their minds ; 
May books and Nature be their early joy ! 
And knowledge, rightly honoured with that 
name — 
Knowledge not purchased by the loss of power ! 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Well do I call to mind the very week 
When I was first intrusted to the care 
Of that sweet Valley ; when its paths, its shores, 
And brooks were like a dream of novelty 
To my half-infant thoughts ; that very week, 
While I was roving up and down alone, 
Seeking I knew not what, I chanced to cross 
One of those open fields, which, shaped like ears, 
Make green peninsulas on Esthwaite's Lake : 
Twilight was coming on, yet through the gloom 
Appeared distinctly on the opposite shore 
A heap of garments, as if left by one 
Who might have there been bathing. Long I 
watched, 
But no one owned them, - meanwhile the calm lake 
Grew dark with all the shadows on its breast, 
And, now and then, a fish up-leaping snapped 
The breathless stillness. The succeeding day, 
Those unclaimed garments telling a plain tale 
Drew to the spot an anxious crowd ; some looked 
In passive expectation from the shore, 
While from a boat others hung o'er the deep, 
Sounding with grappling irons and long poles. 
At last, the dead man, 'mid that beauteous scene 
Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright 
Rose, with his ghastly face, a spectre shape 
Of terror ; yet no soul-debasing fear, 
Young as I was, a child not nine years old, 
Possessed me, for my inner eye had seen 
Such sights before, among the shining streams 
Of faery land, the forest of romance. 
Their spirit hallowed the sad spectacle 
With decoration of ideal grace ; 
A dignity, a smoothness, like the works 
Of Grecian art, and purest poesy. 
A precious treasure had I long possessed, 
A little yellow, canvas-covered book, 
A slender abstract of the Arabian tales ; 
And, from companions in a new abode, 
When first I learnt, that this dear prize of mine 
Was but a block hewn from a mighty quarry — 
That there were four large volumes, laden all 
With kindred matter, 'twas to me, in truth, 
A promise scarcely earthly. Instantly, 
With one. not richer than myself, I made 
A covenant that each should lay aside 
The moneys he possessed, and hoard up more, 
Till our joint savings had amassed enough 
To make this book our own. Through several 
months, 
In spite of all temptation, we preserved 
Religiously that vow ; but firmness failed, 
Nor were we ever masters of our wish. 

And when thereafter to my father's house 
The holidays returned me, there to find 
That golden store of books which I had left, 
What joy was mine ! How often in the course 
Of those glad respites, though a soft west wind 
Ruffled the waters to the angler's wish, 
For a whole day together, have I lain 
Down by thy side, Derwent ! murmuring stream, 
On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun, 
And there have read, devouring as I read, 
Defrauding the day's glory, desperate ! 
Till with a sudden bound of smart reproach, 
Such as an idler deals with in hi shame, 
I to the sport betook myself again. 
A gracious spirit o'er this earth presides, 
And o'er the heart of man ; invisibly 
It comes, to works of unreproved delight, 
And tendency benign, directing those 
Who care not, know not, think not what they do. 
The tales that charm away the wakeful night 
In Araby, romances ; legends penned 
For solace by dim light of monkish lamps ; 
Fictions, for ladies of their love, devised 
By youthful squires ; adventures endless, spun 
By the dismantled warrior in old age, 
Out of the bowels of those very schemes 
In which his youth did first extravagate ; 
These spread like day, and something in the shape 
Of these will live till man shall be no more. 
Dumb yearnings, hidden appetites, are ours, 
And they must have their food. Our childhood 
sits, 
Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne 
That hath more power than all the elementa. 
I guess not what this tells of Being past, 
Nor what it augurs of the life to come ; 
But so it is, and, in that dubious hour, 
That twilight when we first begin to see 
This dawning earth, to recognise, expect, 
And, in the long probation that ensues, 
The time of trial, ere we learn to live 
In reconcilement with our stinted powers ; 
To endure this state of meagre vassalage, 
Unwilling to forego, confess, submit, 
Uneasy and unsettled, yoke-fellows 
To custom, mettlesome, and not yet tamed 
And humbled down; oh ! then we feel, we feel, 
We know where we have friends. Ye dreamers, 
then, 
Forgers of daring tales ! we bless you then, 
Impostors, drivellers, dotards, as the ape 
Philosophy will call you : then we feel 
With what, and how great might ye are in league, 

BOOKS. 

 

Who make our wish, our power, our thought a 
deed, 
An empire, a possession, — ye whom time 
And seasons serve ; all Faculties to whom 
Earth crouches, the elements are potter's clay, 
Space like a heaven filled up with northern lights, 
Here, nowhere, there, and everywhere at once. 
Relinquishing this lofty eminence 
, For ground, though humbler, not the less a tract 
Of the same isthmus, which our spirits cross 
In progress from their native continent 
To earth and human life, the Song might dwell 
On that delightful time of growing youth, 
When craving for the marvellous gives way 
To strengthening love for things that we have seen ; 
: When sober truth and steady sympathies, 
Offered to notice by less daring pens, 
Take firmer hold of us, and words themselves 
Move us with conscious pleasure. 
I am sad 
At thought of rapture now for ever flown ; 
Almost to, tears I sometimes could be sad 
To think of, to read over, many a page, 
Poems withal of name, which at that time 
Did never fail to entrance me, and are now 
, Dead in my eyes, dead as a theatre 
Fresh emptied of spectators. Twice five years 
> Or less I might have seen, when first my mind 
' With conscious pleasure opened to the charm 
Of words in tuneful order, found them sweet 
. For their own sokes, a passion, and a power; 
 And phrases pleased me chosen for delight, 
For pomp, or love. Oft, in the public roads 
! Yet unfrequented, while the morning light 
Was yellowing the hill tops, I went abroad 
With a dear friend, and for the better part 
Of two delightful hours we strolled along 
' By the still borders of the misty lake, 
Repeating favourite verses with one voice, 
: Or conning more, as happy as the birds 

That round us chaunted. Well might we be glad, 
Lifted above the ground by airy fancies, 
More bright than madness or the dreams of wine ; 
And, though full oft the objects of our love 
Were false, and in their splendour overwrought, 
Yet was there surely then no vulgar power 
Working within us, — nothing less, in truth, 
Than that most noble attribute of man, 
Though yet untutored and inordinate, 
That wish for something loftier, more adorned, 
Than is the common aspect, daily garb, 
Of human life. What wonder, then, if sounds 
Of exultation echoed through the groves ! 
For, images, and sentiments, and words, 
And everything encountered or pursued 
In that delicious world of poesy, 
Kept holiday, a never-ending show, 
With music, incense, festival, and flowers ! 
Here must we pause : this only let me add, 
From heart-experience, and in humblest sense 
Of modesty, that he, who in his youth 
A daily wanderer among woods and fields 
With living Nature hath been intimate, 
Not only in that raw unpractised time 
Is stirred to extasy, as others are, 
By glittering verse ; but further, doth receive, 
In measure only dealt out to himself, 
Knowledge and increase of enduring joy 
From the great Nature that exists in works 
Of mighty Poets. Visionary power 
Attends the motions of the viewless winds, 
Embodied in the mystery of words : 
There, darkness makes abode, and all the host 
Of shadowy things work endless changes, — there, 
As in a mansion like their proper home, 
Even forms and substances are circumfused 
By that transparent veil with light divine, 
And, through the turnings intricate of verse, 
Present themselves as objects recognised, 
In flashes, and with glory not their own. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

BOOK SIXTH. 

CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS. 

The leaves were fading when to Esthwaite's banks 
And the simplicities of cottage life 
I bade farewell ; and, one among the youth 
Who, summoned by that season, reunite 
As scattered birds troop to the fowler's lure, 
Went back to Granta's cloisters, not so prompt 
Or eager, though as gay and undepressed 
In mind, as when I thence had taken flight 
A few short months before. I turned my face 
Without repining from the coves and heights 
Clothed in the sunshine of the withering fern ; 
Quitted, not loth, the mild magnificence 
Of calmer lakes and louder streams ; and you, 
Frank-hearted maids of rocky Cumberland, 
You and your not unwelcome days of mirth, 
Relinquished, and your nights of revelry, 
And in my own unlovely cell sate down 
In lightsome mood — such privilege has youth 
That cannot take long leave of pleasant thoughts. 
The bonds of indolent society 
Relaxing in their hold, henceforth I lived 
More to myself. Two winters may be passed 
Without a separate notice : many books 
Were skimmed, devoured, or studiously perused, 
But with no settled plan. I was detached 
Internally from academic cares ; 
Yet independent study seemed a course 
Of hardy disobedience toward friends 
And kindred, proud rebellion and unkind. 
This spurious virtue, rather let it bear 
A name it now deserves, this cowardice, 
Gave treacherous sanction to that over-love 
Of freedom which encouraged me to turn 
From regulations even of my own 
As from restraints and bonds. Yet who can tell — 
Who knows what thus may have been gained, 
both then 
And at a later season, or preserved ; 
What love of nature, what original strength 
Of contemplation, what intuitive truths 
The deepest and the best, what keen research, 
Unbiassed, unbewildered, and unawed ? 
The Poet's soul was with me at that time ; 
Sweet meditations, the still overflow 

Of present happiness, while future years 
Lacked not anticipations, tender dreams, 
No few of which have since been realised ; 
And some remain, hopes for my futurelife. 
Four years and thirty, told this very week, 
Have I been now a sojourner on earth, 
By sorrow not unsmitten ; yet for me 
Life's morning radiance hath not left the hills, 
Her dew is on the flowers. Those were the days 
Which also first emboldened me to trust 
With firmness, hitherto but slightly touched 
By such a daring thought, that I might leave 
Some monument behind me which pure hearts 
Should reverence. The instinctive humbleness, 
Maintained even by the very name and thought 
Of printed books and authorship, began 
To melt away ; and further, the dread awe 
Of mighty names was softened down and seemed 
Approachable, admitting fellowship 
Of modest sympathy. Such aspect now, 
Though not familiarly, my mind put on, 
Content to observe, to achieve, and to enjoy. 
All winter long, whenever free to choose, 
Did I by night frequent the College grove 
And tributary walks ; the last, and oft 
The only one, who had been lingering there 
Through hours of silence, till the porter's bell, 
A punctual follower on the stroke of nine, 
Rang with its blunt unceremonious voice, 
Inexorable summons ! Lofty elms, 
Inviting shades of opportune recess, 
Bestowed composure on a neighbourhood 
Unpeaceful in itself. A single tree 
With sinuous trunk, boughs exquisitely wreathed, 
Grew there ; an ash which Winter for himself 
Decked out with pride, and with outlandish grace : 
Up from the ground, and almost to the top, 
The trunk and every master branch were green 
With clustering ivy, and the lightsome twigs 
And outer spray profusely tipped with seeds 
That hung in yellow tassels, while the air 
Stirred them, not voiceless. Often have I stood 
Foot-bound uplooking at this lovely tree 
Beneath a frosty moon. The hemisphere 
Of magic fiction, verse of mine perchance 
May never tread ; but scarcely Spenser's self 
Could have more tranquil vision in his youth, 

CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS. 

 

Or could more bright appearances create 
.Of human forms with superhuman powers, 
Than I beheld loitering on calm clear nights 
Alone, beneath this fairy work of earth. 
On the vague reading of a truant youth 
;' Twere idle to descant. My inner judgment 
Not seldom differed from my taste in books, 
As if it appertained to another mind, 
And yet the books which then I valued most 
Are dearest to me now ; for, having scanned, 
Not heedlessly, the laws, and watched the forms 
Of Nature, in that knowledge I possessed 
A. standard, often usefully applied, 
Even when unconsciously, to things removed 
From a familiar sympathy. — In fine, 
I was a better judge of thoughts than words, 
Misled in estimating words, not only 
By common inexperience of youth, 
But by the trade in classic niceties, 
The dangerous craft of culling term and phrase 
From languages that want the living voice 
To cany meaning to the natural heart ; 
To tell us what is passion, what is truth, 
;What reason, what simplicity and sense. 
Yet may we not entirely overlook 
The pleasure gathered from the rudiments 
Of geometric science. Though advanced 
In these inquiries, with regret I speak, 
'No farther than the threshold, there I found 
Both elevation and composed delight: 
With Indian awe and wonder, ignorance pleased 
With its own struggles, did I meditate 
On the relation those abstractions bear 
To Nature's laws, and by what process led, 
Those immaterial agents bowed their heads 
Duly to serve the mind of earth-born man ; 
From star to star, from kindred sphere to sphere, 
From system on to system without end. 
More frequently from the same source I drew 
A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense 
Of permanent and universal sway, 
And paramount belief; there, recognised 
 type, for finite natures, of the one 
Supreme Existence, the surpassing life 
Which — to the boundaries of space and time, 
)f melancholy space and doleful time, 
Superior and incapable of change, 
j^or touched by welterings of passion — is, 
|ind hath the name of, God. Transcendent peace 
And silence did await upon these thoughts 
That were a frequent comfort to my youth. 

'Tis told by one whom stormy waters threw, 
With fellow-sufferers by the shipwreck spared, 
Upon a desert coast, that having brought 
To land a single volume, saved by chance, 
A treatise of Geometry, he wont, 
Although of food and clothing destitute, 
And beyond common wretchedness depressed, 
To part from company and take this book 
(Then first a self-taught pupil in its truths) 
To spots remote, and draw his diagrams 
With a long staff upon the sand, and thus 
Did oft beguile his sorrow, and almost 
Forget his feeling : so (if like effect 
From the same cause produced, 'mid outward 
things 
So different, may rightly be compared), 
So was it then with me, and so will be 
With Poets ever. Mighty is the charm 
Of those abstractions to a mind beset 
With images and haunted by herself, 
And specially delightful unto me 
Was that clear synthesis built up aloft 
So gracefully ; even then when it appeared 
Not more than a mere plaything, or a toy 
To sense embodied : not the thing it is 
In verity, an independent world, 
Created out of pure intelligence. 
Such dispositions then were mine unearned 
By aught, I feai", of genuine desert — 
Mine, through heaven's grace and inborn aptitudes. 
And not to leave the story of that time 
Imperfect, with these habits must be joined, 
Moods melancholy, fits of spleen, that loved 
A pensive sky, sad days, and piping winds, 
The twilight more than dawn, autumn than spring; 
A treasured and luxurious gloom of choice 
And inclination mainly, and the mere 
Redundancy of youth's contentedness. 
— To time thus spent, add multitudes of hours 
Pilfered away, by what the Bard who sang 
Of the Enchanter Indolence hath called 
" Good-natured lounging," and behold a map 
Of my collegiate life— far less intense 
Than duty called for, or, without regard 
To duty, might have sprung up of itself 
By change of accidents, or even, to speak 
Without unkindness, in another place. 
Yet why take refuge in that plea ? — the fault, 
This I repeat, was mine ; mine be the blame. 
In summer, making quest for works of art, 
Or scenes renowned for beauty, I explored 
That streamlet whose blue current works its way 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Between romantic Dovedale's spiry rocks ; 
Pried into Yorkshire dales, or hidden tracts 
Of my own native region, and was blest 
Between these sundry wanderings with a joy 
Above all joys, that seemed another morn 
Risen on mid noon; blest with the presence, 
Friend ! 
Of that sole Sister, her who hath been long 
Dear to thee also, thy true friend and mine, 
Now, after separation desolate, 
Restored to me — such absence that she seemed 
A gift then first bestowed. The varied banks 
Of Emont, hitherto unnamed in song, 
And that monastic castle, 'mid tall trees, 
Low standing by the margin of the stream, 
A mansion visited (as fame reports) 
By Sidney, where, in sight of our Helvellyn, 
Or stormy Cross-fell, snatches he might pen 
Of his Arcadia, by fraternal love 
Inspired; — that river and those mouldering towers 
Have seen us side by side, when, having clomb 
The darksome windings of a broken stair, 
And crept along a ridge of fractured wall, 
Not without trembling, we in safety looked 
Forth, through some Gothic window's open space, 
And gathered with one mind a rich reward 
From the far -stretching landscape, by the light 
Of morning beautified, or purple eve ; 
Or, not less pleased, lay on some turret's head, 
Catching from tufts of grass and hare-bell flowers 
Their faintest whisper to the passing breeze, 
Given out while mid-day heat oppressed the plains. 
Another maid there was, who also shed 
A gladness o'er that season, then to me, 
By her exulting outside look of youth 
And placid under-countenance, first endeared ; 
That other spirit, Coleridge ! who is now 
So near to us, that meek confiding heart, 
So reverenced by us both. O'er paths and fields 
In all that neighbourhood, through narrow lanes 
Of eglantine, and through the shady woods, 
And o'er the Border Beacon, and the waste 
Of naked pools, and common crags that lay 
Exposed on the bare fell, were scattered love, 
The spirit of pleasure, and youth's golden, gleam. 
Friend ! we had not seen thee at that time, 
And yet a power is on me, and a strong 
Confusion, and I seem to plant thee there. 
Far art thou wandered now in search of health 
And milder breezes, — melancholy lot ! 
But thou art with us, with us in the past, 
The present, with us in the times to come. 
There is no grief, no sorrow, no despair, 

No languor, no dejection, no dismay, 
No absence scarcely can there be, for those 
Who love as we do. Speed thee well ! divide 
With us thy pleasure ; thy returning strength, 
Receive it daily as a joy of ours; 
Share with us thy fresh spirits, whether gift 
Of gales Etesian or of tender thoughts. 
I, too, have been a wanderer ; but, alas ! 
How different the fate of different men. 
Though mutually unknown, yea nursed and reared 
As if in several elements, we were framed 
To bend at last to the same discipline, 
Predestined, if two beings ever were, 
To seek the same delights, and have one health, 
One happiness. Throughout this narrative, 
Else sooner ended, I have borne in mind 
For whom it registers the birth, and marks the 
growth, 
Of gentleness, simplicity, and truth, 
And joyous loves, that hallow innocent days 
Of peace and self-command. Of rivers, fields, 
And groves I speak to thee, my Friend ! to thee, 
Who, yet a liveried schoolboy, in the depths 
Of the huge city, on the leaded roof 
Of that wide edifice, thy school and home, 
Wert used to lie and gaze upon the clouds 
Moving in heaven ; or, of that pleasure tired, 
To shut thine eyes, and by internal light 
See trees, and meadows, and thy native stream, 
Far distant, thus beheld from year to year 
Of a long exile. Nor could I forget, 
In this late portion of my argument, 
That scarcely, as my term of pupilage 
Ceased, had I left those academic bowers 
When thou wert thither guided. From the heart 
Of London, and from cloisters there, thou earnest, 
And didst sit down in temperance and peace, 
A rigorous student. What a stormy course 
Then followed. Oh ! it is a pang that calls 
For utterance, to think what easy change 
Of circumstances might to thee have spared 
A world of pain, ripened a thousand hopes, 
For ever withered. Through this retrospect 
Of my collegiate life I still have had 
Thy after-sojourn in the self-same place 
Present before my eyes, have played with times 
And accidents as children do with cards, 
Or as a man, who, when his house is built, 
A frame locked up in wood and stone, doth still, 
As impotent fancy prompts, by his fireside, 
Rebuild it to his liking. I have thought 
Of thee, thy learning, gorgeous eloquence, 
And all the strength and plumage of thy youth, 

CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS. 

Thy subtle speculations, toils abstruse 
Among the schoolmen, and Platonic forms 
! Of wild ideal pageantry, shaped out 
From things well-matched or ill, and words for 
things, 
The self-created sustenance of a mind 
Debarred from Nature's living images, 
Compelled to be a life unto herself, 
And unrelentingly possessed by thirst 
;f greatness, love, and beauty. Not alone, 
Ah ! surely not in singleness of heart 
i Should I have seen the light of evening fade 
From smooth Cam's silent waters : had we met, 
Even at that early time, needs must I trust 
tin the belief, that my maturer age, 
:My calmer habits, and more steady voice, 
iWould with an influence benigu have soothed, 
!r chased away, the airy wretchedness 
That battened on thy youth. But thou hast trod 
A march of glory, which doth put to shame 
'These vain regrets ; health suffers in thee, else 
,Such grief for thee would be the weakest thought 
(That ever harboured in the breast of man. 
A passing word erewhile did lightly touch 
On wanderings of my own, that now embraced 
With livelier hope a region wider far. 
When the third summer freed us from restraint, 
A youthful friend, he too a mountaineer, 
Not slow to share my wishes, took his staff, 
And sallying forth, we journeyed side by side, 
(Bound to the distant Alps. A hardy slight 
Did this unprecedented course imply 
■Of college studies and their set rewards ; 
,- Nor had, in truth, the scheme been formed by me 
Without uneasy forethought of the pain, 
The censures, aud ill-omeniug of those 
ITo whom my worldly interests were dear. 
But Nature then was sovereign in my mind, 
i And mighty forms, seizing a youthful fancy, 
Had given a charter to irregular hopes. 
; In any age of uneventful calm 
: Among the nations, surely would my heart 
:Have been possessed by similar desire ; 
But Europe at that time was thrilled with joy, 
France standing on the top of golden hours, 
And human nature seeming born again. 
(Lightly equipped, and but a few brief looks 
Cast on the white cliffs of our native shore 
(From the receding vessel's deck, we chanced 
jTo land at Calais on the very eve 
j Of that great federal day ; and there we saw, 

In a mean city, and among a few, 
How bright a face is worn when joy of one 
Is joy for tens of millions. Southward thence 
We held our way, direct through hamlets, towns, 
Gaudy with reliques of that festival, 
Flowers left to wither on triumphal arcs, 
And window-garlands. On the public roads, 
And, once, three days successively, through paths 
By which our toilsome journey was abridged, 
Among sequestered villages we walked 
And found benevolence aud blessedness 
Spread like a fragrance everywhere, when spring 
Hath left no corner of the land untouched ; 
Where elms for many and many a league in files 
With their thin umbrage, on the stately roads 
Of that great kingdom, rustled o'er our heads, 
For ever near us as we paced along : 
How sweet at such a time, with such delight 
On every side, in prime of youthful strength, 
To feed a Poet's tender melancholy 
And fond conceit of sadness, with the sound 
Of undulations varying as might please 
The wind that swayed them; once, and more 
than once, 
Unhoused beneath the evening star we saw 
Dances of liberty, and in late hours 
Of darkness, dances in the open air 
Deftly prolonged, though grey-haired lookers on 
Might waste their breath in chiding. 
Under hills — 
The vine-clad hills and slopes of Burgundy, 
Upon the bosom of the gentle Saone 
We glided forward with the flowing stream. 
Swift Rhone ! thou wert the wings on which we cut 
A winding passage with majestic ease 
Between thy lofty rocks. Enchanting show 
Those woods and farms and orchards did present, 
And single cottages and lurking towns, 
Reach after reach, succession without end 
Of deep and stately vales ! A lonely pair 
Of strangers, till day closed, we sailed along 
Clustered together with a merry crowd 
Of those emancipated, a blithe host 
Of travellers, chiefly delegates, returning 
From the great spousals newly solemnised 
At their chief city, in the sight of Heaven. 
Like bees they swarmed, gaudy and gay as bees ; 
Some vapoured in the unruliness of joy, 
And with their swords flourished as if to fight 
The saucy air. In this proud company 
We landed — took with them our evening meal, 
Guests welcome almost as the angels were 
To Abraham of old. The supper done, 
With flowing cups elate and happy thoughts 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

We rose at signal given, and formed a ring 
And, hand in hand, danced round and round the 
board ; 
All hearts were open, every tongue was loud 
With amity and glee ; we bore a name 
Honoured in France, the name of Englishmen, 
And hospitably did they give us hail, 
As their forerunners in a glorious course ; 
And round and round the board we danced again. 
With these blithe friends our voyage we renewed 
At early dawn. The monastery bells 
Made a sweet jingling in our youthful ears ; 
The rapid river flowing without noise, 
And each uprising or receding spire 
Spake with a sense of peace, at intervals 
Touching the heart amid the boisterous crew 
By whom we were encompassed. Taking leave 
Of this glad throng, foot-travellers side by side, 
Measuring our steps in quiet, we pursued 
Our journey, and ere twice the sun had set 
Beheld the Convent of Chartreuse, and there 
Rested within an awful solitude : 
Yes ; for even then no other than a place 
Of soul-affecting solitude appeared 
That far-famed region, though our eyes had seen, 
As toward the sacred mansion we advanced, 
Arms flashing, and a military glare 
Of riotous men commissioned to expel 
The blameless inmates, and belike subvert 
That frame of social being, which so long 
Had bodied forth the ghostliness of things 
In silence visible and perpetual calm. 
— " Stay, stay your sacrilegious hands ! " — The 
voice 
Was Nature's, uttered from her Alpine throne ; 
I heard it then and seem to hear it now — 
" Your impious work forbear, perish what may, 
Let this one temple last, be this one spot 
Of earth devoted to eternity ! " 
She ceased to speak, but while St. Bruno's pines 
Waved their dark tops, not silent as they waved, 
And while below, along their several beds, 
Murmured the sister streams of Life and Death, 
Thus by conflicting passions pressed, my heart 
Responded ; " Honour to the patriot's zeal ! 
Glory and hope to new-born Liberty ! 
Hail to the mighty projects of the time ! 
Discerning sword that Justice wields, do thou 
Go forth and prosper ; and, ye purging fires, 
Up to the loftiest towers of Pride ascend, 
Fanned by the breath of angry Providence. 
But oh ! if Past and Future be the wings 
On whose support harmoniously conjoined 
Moves the great sphit of human knowledge, spare 

These courts of mystery, where a step advanced 
Between the portals of the shadowy rocks 
Leaves far behind life's treacherous vanities, 
For penitential tears and trembling hopes 
Exchanged — to equalise in God's pure sight 
Monarch and peasant : be the house redeemed 
With its unworldly votaries, for the sake 
Of conquest over sense, hourly achieved 
Through faith and meditative reason, resting 
Upon the word of heaven-imparted truth, 
Calmly triumphant ; and for humbler claim 
Of that imaginative impulse sent 
From these majestic floods, yon shining cliffs, 
The untransmuted shapes of many worlds, 
Cerulean ether's pure inhabitants, 
These forests unapproachable by death, 
That shall endure as long as man endures, 
To think, to hope, to worship, and to feel, 
To struggle, to be lost within himself 
In trepidation, from the blank abyss 
To look with bodily eyes, and be consoled." 
Not seldom since that moment have I wished 
That thou, Friend ! the trouble or the calm 
Hadst shared, when, from profane regards apart, 
In sympathetic reverence we trod 
The floors of those dim cloisters, till that hour, 
From their foundation, strangers to the presence 
Of unrestricted and unthinking man. 
Abroad, how cheeringly the sunshine lay 
Upon the open lawns ! Vallombre's groves 
Entering, we fed the soul with darkness ; thence 
Issued, and with uplifted eyes beheld, 
In different quarters of the bending sky, 
The cross of Jesus stand erect, as if 
Hands of angelic powers had fixed it there, 
Memorial reverenced by a thousand storms ; 
Yet then, from the undiscriminating sweep 
And rage of one State-whirlwind, insecure. 
'Tis not my present purpose to retrace 
That variegated journey step by step. 
A march it was of military speed, 
And Earth did change her images and forms 
Before us, fast as clouds are changed in heaven. 
Day after day, up early and down late, 
From hill to vale we dropped, from vale to hill 
Mounted — from province on to province swept, 
Keen hunters in a chase of fourteen weeks, 
Eager as birds of prey, or as a ship 
Upon the stretch, when winds are blowing fair : 
Sweet coverts did we cross of pastoral life, 
Enticing valleys, greeted them and left 
Too soon, while yet the very flash and gleam 
Of salutation were not passed away. 

CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS. 

 

Oh ! sorrow for the youth who could have seen 
Unchastened, unsubdued, unawed, unraised 
To patriarchal dignity of mind, 
And pure simplicity of wish and will, 
Those sanctified abodes of peaceful man, 
Pleased (though to hardship born, and compassed 
round 
Rlth danger, varying as the seasons change), 
Pleased with his daily task, or, if not pleased, 
Contented, from the moment that the dawn 
Ah ! surely not without attendant gleams 
Of soul-illumination) calls him forth 
To industry, by glistenings flung on rocks, 
iVhose evening shadows lead him to repose. 
Well might a stranger look with bounding heart 
Down on a green recess, the first I saw 
)f those deep haunts, an aboriginal vale, 
Juiet and lorded over and possessed 
y naked huts, wood-built, and sown like tents 
)r Indian cabins over the fresh lawns 
Ind by the river side. 
That very day, 
?rom a bare ridge we also first beheld 
Jnveiled the summit of Mont Blanc, and grieved 
fo have a soulless image on the eye 
?hat had usurped upon a living thought 
?hat never more could be. The wondrous Vale 
)f Chamouny stretched far below, and soon 
Vith its dumb cataracts and streams of ice, 
|L motionless array of mighty waves, 
'ive rivers broad and vast, made rich amends, 
; t.nd reconciled us to realities ; 
'here small birds warble from the leafy trees, 
'he eagle soars high in the element, 
'here doth the reaper bind the yellow sheaf, 
'he maiden spread the haycock in the sun, 
Yhile Winter like a well-tamed lion walks, 
descending from the mountain to make sport 
.mong the cottages by beds of flowers. 
Whate'er in this wide circuit we beheld, 
f heard, was fitted to our unripe state 
!f intellect and heart. With such a book 
efore our eyes, we could not choose but read 
essons of genuine brotherhood, the plain 
nd universal reason of mankind, 
he truths of young and old. Nor, side by side 
acing, two social pilgrims, or alone 
jach with his humour, could we fail to abound 
i dreams and fictions, pensively composed : 
j ejection taken up for pleasure's sake, 
nd gilded sympathies, the willow wreath, 
nd sober posies of funereal flowers, 

Gathered among those solitudes sublime 
From formal gardens of the lady Sorrow, 
Did sweeten many a meditative hour. 
Yet still in me with those soft luxuries 
Mixed something of stern mood, an under-thirst 
Of vigour seldom utterly allayed : 
And from that source how different a sadness 
Would issue, let one incident make known. 
When from the Vallais we had turned, and clomb 
Along the Simplon's steep and rugged road, 
Following a band of muleteers, we reached 
A halting-place, where all together took 
Their noon-tide meal. Hastily rose our guide, 
Leaving us at the board ; awhile we lingered, 
Then paced the beaten downward way that led 
Eight to a rough stream's edge, and there broke 
off; 
The only track now visible was one 
That from the torrent's further brink held forth 
Conspicuous invitation to ascend 
A lofty mountain. After brief delay 
Crossing the unbridged stream, that road we took, 
And clomb with eagerness, till anxious fears 
Intruded, for we failed to overtake 
Our comrades gone before. By fortunate chance, 
While every moment added doubt to doubt, 
A peasant met us, from whose mouth we learned 
That to the spot which had perplexed us first 
We must descend, and there should find the road, 
Which in the stony channel of the stream 
Lay a few steps, and then along its banks ; 
And, that our future course, all plain to sight, 
Was downwards, with the current of that stream. 
Loth to believe what we so grieved to hear, 
For still we had hopes that pointed to the clouds, 
We questioned him again, and yet again ; 
But every word that from the peasant's lips 
Came in reply, translated by our feelings, 
Ended in this, — that we had crossed the Alps. 
Imagination — here the Power so-called 
Through sad incompetence of human speech, 
That awful Power rose from the mind's abyss 
Like an unfathered vapour that enwraps, 
At once, some lonely traveller. I was lost ; 
Halted without an effort to break through; 
But to my conscious soul I now can say — 
" I recognise thy glory : " in such strength 
Of usurpation, when the light of sense 
Goes out, but with a flash that has revealed 
The invisible world, doth greatness make abode, 
There harbours ; whether we be young or old, 
Our destiny, our being's heart and home, 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Is with infinitude, and only there ; 
With hope it is, hope that can never die, 
Effort, and expectation, and desire, 
And something evermore about to be. 
Under such banners militant, the soul 
Seeks for no trophies, struggles for no spoils 
That may attest her prowess, blest in thoughts 
That are their own perfection and reward, 
Strong in herself and in beatitude 
That hides ber, like the mighty flood of Nile 
Poured from his fount of Abyssinian clouds 
To fertilise the whole Egyptian plain. 
The melancholy slackening that ensued 
Upon those tidings by the peasant given 
Was soon dislodged. Downwards we hurried fast, 
And, with the half-shaped road which we had 
missed, 
Entered a narrow chasm. The brook and road 
Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy strait, 
And with them did we journey several hours 
At a slow pace. The immeasurable height 
Of woods decaying, never to be decayed, 
The stationary blasts of waterfalls, 
And in the narrow rent at every turn 
Winds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn, 
The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky, 
The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, 
Black drizzling crags that spake by the way-side 
As if a voice were in them, the sick sight 
And giddy prospect of the raving stream, 
The unfettered clouds and region of the Heavens, 
Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light — 
Were all like workings of one mind, the features 
Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree ; 
Characters of the great Apocalypse, 
The types and symbols of Eternity, 
Of first, and last, and midst, and without end. 
That night our lodging was a house that stood 
Alone within the valley, at a point 
Where, tumbling from aloft, a torrent swelled 
The rapid stream whose margin we had trod ; 
A dreary mansion, large beyond all need, 
With high and spacious rooms, deafened and 
stunned 
By noise of waters, making innocent sleep 
Lie melancholy among weary bones. 
Uprisen betimes, our journey we renewed, 
Led by the stream, ere noon-day mag ;ified 
Into a lordly river, broad and deep, 

 See p. .— Ed. 

Dimpling along in silent majesty, 
With mountains for its neighbours, and in view 
Of distant mountains and their snowy tops, 
And thus proceeding to Locarno's Lake, 
Fit resting-place for such a visitant. 
Locarno ! spreading out in width like Heaven, 
How dost thou cleave to the poetic heart, 
Bask in the sunshine of the memory ; 
And Como ! thou, a treasure whom the earth 
Keeps to herself, confined as in a depth 
Of Abyssinian privacy. I spake 
Of thee, thy chestnut woods, and garden plots 
Of Indian corn tended by dark-eyed maids ; 
Thy lofty steeps, and pathways roofed with vine; 
Winding from house to house, from town to towr 
Sole link that binds them to each other ; walks, 
League after league, and cloistral avenues, 
Where silence dwells if music be not there : 
While yet a youth undisciplined in verse, 
Through fond ambition of that hour I strove 
To chant your praise ; nor can approach you not 
Ungreeted by a more melodious Song, 
Where tones of Nature smoothed by learned Ar 
May flow in lasting current. Like a breeze 
Or sunbeam over your domain I passed 
In motion without pause ; but ye have left 
Your beauty with me, a serene accord 
Of forms and colours, passive, yet endowed 
In their submissiveness with power as sweet 
And gracious, almost might I dare to say, 
As virtue is, or goodness ; sweet as love, 
Or the remembrance of a generous deed, 
Or mildest visitations of pure thought, 
When God, the giver of all joy, is thanked 
Religiously, in silent blessedness ; 
Sweet as this last herself, for such it is. 
With those delightful pathways we advanced, ! 
For two days' space, in presence of the Lake, 
That, stretching far among the Alps, assumed 
A character more stern. The second night, 
From sleep awakened, and misled by sound 
Of the church clock telling the hours with stroke 
Whose import then we had not learned, we rose 
By moonlight, doubting not that day was nigh, | 
And that meanwhile, by no uncertain patb, 
Along the winding margin of the lake, 
Led, as before, we should behold the scene 
Hushed in profound repose. We left the town ! 
Of Gravedona with this hope ; but soon 
Were lost, bewildered among woods immense, 
And on a rock sate down, to wait for day. 
An open place it was, and overlooked, 
From high, the sullen water far beneath, 



CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS. 

 

n which a dull red image of the moon 
Lay bedded, changing oftentimes its form 
Like an uneasy snake. From hour to hour 
We sate and sate, wondering, as if the night 
Had been ensnared by witchcraft. On the rock 
At last we stretched our weary limbs for sleep, 
But could not sleep, tormented by the stings 
Of insects, which, with noise like that of noon, 
Filled all the woods : the cry of unknown birds ; 
The mountains more by blackness visible 
And their own size, than any outward light ; 
The breathless wilderness of clouds ; the clock 
That told, with unintelligible voice, 
The widely pai-ted hours ; the noise of streams, 
And sometimes rustling motions nigh at hand, 
That did not leave us free from personal fear ; 
And, lastly, the withdrawing moon, that set 
Before us, while she still was high in heaven; — 
These were our food ; and such a summer's night 
Followed that pair of golden days that shed 
On Como's Lake, and all that round it lay, 
Their fairest, softest, happiest influence. 
But here I must break off, and bid farewell 
To days, each offering some new sight, or fraught 
With some untried adventure, in a course 
Prolonged till sprinklings of autumnal snow 
phecked our unwearied steps. Let this alone 
Be mentioned as a parting word, that not 
In hollow exultation, dealing out 
hyperboles of praise comparative ; 
!Tot rich one moment to be poor for ever ; 
;Sot prostrate, overborne, as if the mind 
'derself were nothing, a mere pensioner 
( Dn outward forms — did we in presence stand 
Of that magnificent region. On the front 
Of this whole Song is written that my heart 
Hust, in such Temple, needs have offered up 
X different worship. Finally, whate'er 

I saw, or heard, or felt, was but a stream 
That flowed into a kindred stream ; a gale. 
Confederate with the current of the soul, 
To speed my voyage ; every sound or sight, 
In its degree of power, administered 
To grandeur or to tenderness, — to the one 
Directly, but to tender thoughts by means 
Less often instantaneous in effect ; 
Led me to these by paths that, in the main, 
Were more circuitous, but not less sure 
Duly to reach the point marked out by Heaven. 
Oh, most beloved Friend ! a glorious time, 
A happy time that was ; triumphant looks 
Were then the common language of all eyes ; 
As if awaked from sleep, the Nations hailed 
Their great expectancy : the fife of war 
Was then a spirit-stirring sound indeed, 
A blackbird's whistle in a budding grove. 
We left the Swiss exulting in the fate 
Of their near neighbours ; and, when shortening 
fast 
Our pilgrimage, nor distant far from home, 
We crossed the Brabant armies on the fret 
For battle in the cause of Liberty. 
A stripling, scarcely of the household then 
Of social life, I looked upon these things 
As from a distance ; heard, and saw, and felt, 
Was touched, but with no intimate concern ; 
I seemed to move along them, as a bird 
Moves through the air, or as a fish pursues 
Its sport, or feeds in its proper element ; 
I wanted not that joy, I did not need 
Such help; the ever-living universe, 
Turn where I might, was opening out its glories, 
And the independent spirit of pure youth 
Called forth, at every season, new delights 
Spread round my steps like sunshine o'er green 
fields. 

£ 

THE PRELUDE. 

BOOK SEVENTH. 

RESIDENCE IN LONDON. 

Six changeful years have vanished since I first 
Poured out (saluted by that quickening breeze 
Which met me issuing from the City's walls) 
A glad preamble to this Verse : I sang 
Aloud, with fervour irresistible 
Of short-lived transport, like a torrent bursting, 
From a black thunder-cloud, down Scafell's side 
To rush and disappear. But soon broke forth 
(So willed the Muse) a less impetuous stream, 
That flowed awhile with unabating strength, 
Then stopped for years ; not audible again 
Before last primrose-time. Beloved Friend ! 
The assurance which then cheered some heavy 
thoughts 
On thy departure to a foreign land 
Has failed ; too slowly moves the promised work. 
Through the whole summer have I been at rest, 
Partly from voluntary holiday, 
And part through outward hindrance. But I heard, 
After the hour of sunset yester-even, 
Sitting within doors between light and dark, 
A choir of red-breasts gathered somewhere near 
My threshold, — minstrels from the distant woods 
Sent in on Winter's service, to announce, 
AVith preparation artful and benign, 
That the rough lord had left the surly North 
On his accustomed journey. The delight, 
Due to this timely notice, unawares 
Smote me, and, listening, I in whispers said, 
" Ye heartsome Choristers, ye and I will be 
Associates, and, unscared by blustering winds, 
Will chant together." Thereafter, as the shades 
Of twilight deepened, going forth, I spied 
A glow-worm underneath a dusky plume 
Or canopy of yet unwithered fern, 
Clear-shining, like a hermit's taper seen 
Through a thick forest. Silence touched me here 
No less than sound had done before ; the child 
Of Summer, lingering, shining, by herself, 
The voiceless worm on the unfrequented hills, 
Seemed sent on the same errand with the choir 
Of Winter that had warbled at my door, 
And the whole year breathed tenderness and love. 

The last night's genial feeling overflowed 
Upon this morning, and my favourite grove, 
Tossing in sunshine its dark boughs aloft, 
As if to make the strong wind visible, 
Wakes in me agitations like its own, 
A spirit friendly to the Poet's task, 
Which we will now resume with lively hope, 
Nor checked by aught of tamer argument 
That lies before us, needful to be told. 
Returned from that excursion, soon I bade 
Farewell for ever to the sheltered seats 
Of gowned students, quitted hall and bower, 
And every comfort of that privileged ground, 
Well pleased to pitch a vagrant tent among 
The unfenced regions of society. 
Yet, undetermined to what course of life 
I should adhere, and seeming to possess 
A little space of intermediate time 
At full command, to London first I turned, 
In no disturbance of excessive hope, 
By personal ambition unenslaved, 
Frugal as there was need, and, though self-willed, 
From dangerous passions free. Three years had 
flown 
Since I had felt in heart and soul the shock 
Of the huge town's first presence, and had paced 
Her endless streets, a transient visitant : 
Now, fixed amid that concourse of mankind 
Where Pleasure whirls about incessantly, 
And life and labour seem but one, I filled 
An idler's place ; au idler well content 
To have a house (what matter for a home ?) 
That owned him ; living cheerfully abroad 
With unchecked fancy ever on the stir, 
And all my young affections out of doors. 
There was a time when whatsoe'er is feigned 
Of airy palaces, and gardens built 
By Genii of romance ; or hath in grave 
Authentic history been set forth of Rome, 
Alcairo, Babylon, or Persepolis ; 
Or given upon report by pilgrim friars, 
Of golden cities ten months' journey deep 
Among Tartarian wilds — fell short, far short, 

Tho City of Goslar, in Lower Saxony. — Ed. 

i p. .— Ed. 

RESIDENCE IN LONDON. 

 

Of what my fond simplicity believed 
 And thought of London — held me by a chain 
Less strong of wonder and obscure delight. 
Whether the bolt of childhood's Fancy shot 
For me beyond its ordinary mark, 
i 'Twere vain to ask ; but in our flock of boys 
Was One, a cripple from his birth, whom chance 
Summoned from school to London ; fortunate 
And envied traveller ! When the Boy returned, 
| After short absence, curiously I scanned 
t His mien and person, nor was free, in sooth, 
From disappointment, not to find some change 
In look and air, from that new region brought, 
As if from Fairy-land. Much I questioned him ; 
iAnd every word he uttered, on my ears 
Fell flatter than a caged parrot's note, 
That answers unexpectedly awry, 
And mocks the prompter's listening. Marvellous 
things 
Had vanity (quick Spirit that appears 
jAlmost as deeply seated and as strong 
lln a Child's heart as fear itself) conceived 
iFor my enjoyment. Would that I could now 
iRecal what then I pictured to myself, 
Of mitred Prelates, Lords in ermine clad, 
i The King, and the King's Palace, and, not last, 
; Nor least, Heaven bless him! the renowned Lord 
Mayor : 
Dreams not unlike to those which once begat 
|A change of purpose in young Whittington, 
When he, a friendless and a drooping boy, 
;Sate on a stone, and heard the bells speak out 
Articulate music. Above all, one thought 
Baffled my understanding : how men lived 
Even next-door neighbours, as we say, yet still 
i Strangers, not knowing each the other's name. 
, woud'rous power of words, by simple faith 
Licensed to take the meaning that we love ! 
jVauxhall and Ranelagh! I then had heard 
Of your green groves, and wilderness of lamps 
.Dimming the stars, and fireworks magical, 
;And gorgeous ladies, under splendid domes, 
'Floating in dance, or warbling high in air 
'The songs of spirits ! Nor had Fancy fed 
With less delight upon that other class 
Of marvels, broad-day wonders permanent: 
The River proudly bridged; the dizzy top 
(And Whispering Gallery of St. Paul's ; the tombs 
|f Westminster; the Giants of Guildhall ; 
Bedlam, and those carved maniacs at the gates, 
'Perpetually recumbent; Statues— man, 
And the horse under him — in gilded pomp 
j Adorning flowery gardens, 'mid vast squares; 

The Monument, and that Chamber of the Tower 
Where England's sovereigns sit in long array, 
Their steeds bestriding, — every mimic shape 
Cased in the gleaming mail the monarch wore, 
Whether for gorgeous tournament addressed, 
Or life or death upon the battle-field. 
Those bold imaginations in due time 
Had vanished, leaving others in their stead : 
And now I looked upon the living scene ; 
Familiarly perused it ; oftentimes, 
In spite of strongest disappointment, pleased 
Through courteous self-submission, as a tax 
Paid to the object by prescriptive right. 
Rise up, thou monstrous ant-hill on the plain 
Of a too busy world ! Before me flow, 
Thou endless stream of men and moving things ! 
Thy every-d;iy appearance, as it strikes — 
With wonder heightened, or sublimed by awe — 
On strangers, of all ages ; the quick dance 
Of colours, lights, and forms; the deafening din; 
The comers and the goers face to face, 
Face after face ; the string of dazzling wares, 
Shop after shop, with symbols, blazoned names, 
And all the tradesman's honours overhead : 
Here, fronts of houses, like a title-page, 
With letters huge inscribed from top to toe, 
Stationed above the door, like guardian saints ; 
There, allegoric shapes, female or male, 
Or physiognomies of real men, 
Land-warriors, kings, or admirals of the sea, 
Boyle, Shakspeare, Newton, or the attractive head 
Of some quack-doctor, famous in his day. 
Meanwhile the roar continues, till at length, 
Escaped as from an enemy, we turn 
Abruptly into some sequestered nook, 
Still as a sheltered place when winds blow 
loud ! 
At leisure, thence, through tracts of thin resort, 
And sights and sounds that come at intervals, 
We take our way. A raree-show is here, 
With children gathered round ;. another street 
Presents a company of dancing dogs, 
Or dromedary, with an antic pair 
Of monkeys on his back ; a minstrel band 
Of Savoyards ; or, single and alone, 
An English ballad-singer. Private courts, 
Gloomy as coffins, and unsightly lanes 
Thrilled by some female vendor's scream, belike 
The very shrillest of all London cries, 
May then entangle our impatient steps ; 
Conducted through those labyrinths, unawares, 
To privileged regions and inviolate, 
Il 


 

THE PRELUDE. 

Where from their airy lodges studious lawyers 
Look out on waters, walks, and gardens green. 
Thence back into the throng, until we reach, 
Following the tide that slackens by degrees, 
Some half-frequented scene, where wider streets 
Bring straggling breezes of suburban air. 
Here files of ballads dangle from dead walls ; 
Advertisements, of giant-size, from high 
Press forward, in all colours, on the sight ; 
These, bold in conscious merit, lower down ; 
That, fronted with a most imposing word, 
Is, peradventure, one in masquerade. 
As on the broadening causeway we advance, 
Behold, turned upwards, a face hard and strong 
In lineaments, and red with over -toil. 
'Tis one encountered here and everywhere ; 
A travelling cripple, by the trunk cut short, 
And stumping on his arms. In sailor's garb 
Another lies at length, beside a range 
Of well-formed characters, with chalk inscribed 
Upon the smooth flat stones : the Nurse is here, 
The Bachelor, that loves to sun himself, 
The military Idler, and the Dame, 
That field-ward takes her walk with decent steps. 
Now homeward through the thickening hubbub, 
where 
See, among less distinguishable shapes, 
The begging scavenger, with hat in hand ; 
The Italian, as he thrids his way with care, 
Steadying, far-seen, a frame of images 
Upon his head ; with basket at his breast 
The Jew ; the stately and slow-moving Turk, 
With freight of slippers piled beneath his arm ! 
Enough ; — the mighty concourse I surveyed 
With no unthinking mind, well pleased to note 
Among the crowd all specimens of man, 
Through all the colours which the sun bestows, 
And every character of form and face : 
The Swede, the Russian ; from the genial south, 
The Frenchman and the Spaniard ; from remote 
America, the Hunter-Indian ; Moors, 
Malays, Lascars, the Tartar, the Chinese, 
And Negro Ladies in white muslin gowns. 
At leisure, then, I viewed, from day to day, 
The spectacles within doors, — birds and beasts 
Of every nature, and strange plants convened 
From every clime ; and, next, those sights that ape 
The absolute presence of reality, 
Expressing, as in mirror, sea and land, 
And what earth is, and what she has to show. 

I do not here allude to subtlest craft, 
By means refined attaining purest ends, 
But imitations, fondly made in plain 
Confession of man's weakness and his loves. 
Whether the Painter, whose ambitious skill 
Submits to nothing less than taking in 
A whole horizon's circuit, do with power, 
Like that of angels or commissioned spirits, 
Fix us upon some lofty pinnacle, 
Or in a ship on waters, with a world 
Of life, and life-like mockery beneath, 
Above, behind, far stretching and before ; 
Or more mechanic artist represent 
By scale exact, in model, wood or clay, 
From blended colours also borrowing help, 
Some miniature of famous spots or things, — 
St. Peter's Church; or, more aspiring aim, 
In microscopic vision, Rome herself ; 
Or, haply, some choice rural haunt,-— the Falls 
Of Tivoli; and, high upon that steep, 
The Sibyl's mouldering Temple ! every tree, 
Villa, or cottage, lurking among rocks 
Throughout the landscape; tuft, stone scratch 
minute — 
All that the traveller sees when he is there. 
Add to these exhibitions, mute and still, 
Others of wider scope, where living men, 
Music, and shifting pantomimic scenes, 
Diversified the allurement. Need I fear 
To mention by its name, as in degree, 
Lowest of these and humblest in attempt, 
Yet richly graced with honours of her own, 
Half-rural Sadler's Wells  Though at that time 
Intolerant, as is the way of youth 
Unless itself be pleased, here more than once 
Taking my seat, I saw (nor blush to add, 
With ample recompense) giants and dwarfs, 
Clowns, conjurors, posture-masters, harlequins, 
Amid the uproar of the rabblement, 
Perform their feats. Nor was it mean delight 
To watch crude Nature work in untaught minds; 
To note the laws and progress of belief; 
Though obstinate on this way, yet on that 
How willingly we travel, and how far ! 
To have, for instance, brought upon the scene 
The champion, Jack the Giant-killer : Lo ! 
He dons his coat of darkness ; on the stage 
Walks, and achieves his wonders, from the eye 
Of living Mortal covert, " as the moon 
Hid in her vacant interlunar cave." 
Delusion bold ! and how can it be wrought ? 
The garb he wears is black as death, the word 
" Invisible " flames forth upon his chest. 

RESIDENCE IN LONDON". 

 

Here, too, were "forms and pressures of the 
time," 
lough, bold, as Grecian comedy displayed 
Vhen Art was young ; dramas of living men, 
L nd recent things yet warm with life ; a sea-fight, 
hipwreck, or some domestic incident 
divulged by Truth and magnified by Fame; 
uch as the daring brotherhood of late 
et forth, too serious theme for that light place — 
mean, distant Friend ! a story drawn 
Yom our own ground , — theMaid of Buttermere, — 
ind how, unfaithful to a virtuous wife 
)eserted and deceived, the Spoiler came 
i.nd wooed the artless daughter of the hills, 
aid wedded her, in cruel mockery 
)f love and marriage bonds. These words to thee 
lust needs bring back the moment when we first, 
'ire the broad world rang with the maiden's name, 
Seheld her serving at the cottage inn ; 
oth stricken, as she entered or withdrew, 
Yith admiration of her modest mien 
md carriage, marked by unexampled grace. 
\Ve since that time not unfamiliarly 
lave seen her, — her discretion have observed, 
ler just opinions, delicate reserve, 
ler patience, and humility of mind 
Jnspoiled by commendation and the excess 
: )f public notice — an offensive light 
fo a meek spirit suffering inwardly. 
 From this memorial tribute to my theme 
was returning, when, with sundry forms 
iommingled — shapes which met me in the way 
'hat we must tread— thy image rose again, 
.laiden of Buttermere ! She lives in peace 
Ipon the spot where she was born and reared ; 
Vithout contamination doth she live 
n quietness, without anxiety : 
•leside the mountain chapel, sleeps in earth 
ler new-born infant, fearless as a lamb 
'hat, thither driven from some unsheltered place, 
tests underneath the little rock-like pile 
Fhen storms are raging. Happy are they both — 
lother and child ! — These feelings, in themselves 
,'rite, do yet scarcely seem so when I think 
; n those ingenuous moments of our youth 
lire we have learnt by use to slight the crimes 
'Jid sorrows of the world. Those simple days 
.re now my theme ; and, foremost of the scenes, 
l^hich yet survive in memory, appears 
me, at whose centre sate a lovely Boy, 
L sportive infant, who, for six months' space, 
Tot more, had been of age to deal about 
Articulate prattle — Child as beautiful 

As ever clung around a mother's neck, 
Or father fondly gazed upon with pride. 
There, too, conspicuous for stature tall 
And large dark eyes, beside her infant stood 
The mother ; but, upon her cheeks diffused, 
False tints too well accorded with the glare 
From play-house lustres thrown without reserve 
On every object near. The Boy had been 
The pride and pleasure of all lookers-on 
In whatsoever place, but seemed in this 
A sort of alien scattered from the clouds. 
Of lusty vigour, more than infantine 
He was in limb, in cheek a summer rose 
Just three parts blown — a cottage-child — if e'er, 
By cottage-door on breezy mountain side, 
Or in some sheltering vale, was seen a babe 
By Nature's gifts so favoured. Upon a board 
Decked with refreshments had this child been 
placed, 
His little stage in the vast theatre, 
And there he sate surrounded with a throng 
Of chance spectators, chiefly dissolute men 
And shameless women, treated and caressed; 
Ate, drank, and with the fruit and glasses played, 
While oaths and laughter and indecent speech 
Were rife about him as the songs of birds 
Contending after showers. The mother now 
Is fading out of memory, but I see 
The lovely Boy as I beheld him then 
Among the wretched and the falsely gay, 
Like one of those who walked with hair unsinged 
Amid the fiery furnace. Charms and spells 
Muttered on black and spiteful instigation 
Have stopped, as some believe, the kindliest 
growths. 
Ah, with how different spirit might a prayer 
Have been preferred, that this fair creature, 
checked 
By special privilege of Nature's love, 
Should in his childhood be detained for ever ! 
But with its universal freight the tide 
Hath rolled along, and this bright innocent, 
Maiy ! may now have lived till he could look 
With envy on thy nameless babe that sleeps, 
Beside the mountain chapel, undisturbed. 
Four rapid years had scarcely then been told 
Since, travel! ing southward from our pastoral hills, 
I heard, and for the first time in my life, 
The voice of woman utter blasphemy — 
Saw woman as she is, to open shame 
Abandoned, and the pride of public vice ; 
I shuddered, for a barrier seemed at once 
Thrown in that from humanity divorced 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Humanity, splitting the race of man 
In twain, yet leaving the same outward form. 
Distress of mind ensued upon the sight, 
And ardent meditation. Later years 
Brought to such spectacle a milder sadness, 
Feelings of pure commiseration, grief 
For the individual and the overthrow 
Of her soul's beauty ; farther I was then 
But seldom led, or wished to go ; in truth 
The sorrow of the passion stopped me there. 
But let me now, less moved, in order take 
Our argument. Enough is said to show 
How casual incidents of real life, 
Observed where pastime only had been sought, 
Outweighed, or put to flight, the set events 
And measured passions of the stage, albeit 
By Siddons trod in the fulness of her power. 
Yet was the theatre my dear delight ; 
The very gilding, lamps and painted scrolls, 
And all the mean upholstery of the place, 
Wanted not animation, when the tide 
Of pleasure ebbed but to return as fast 
"With the ever-shifting figures of the scene, 
Solemn or gay : whether some beauteous dame 
Advanced in radiance through a deep recess 
Of thick entangled forest, like the moon 
Opening the clouds; or sovereign king, announced 
With flourishing trumpet, came in full-blown state 
Of the world's greatness, winding round with train 
Of courtiers, banners, and a length of guards ; 
Or captive led in abject weeds, and jingling 
His slender manacles ; or romping girl 
Bounced, leapt, and pawed the air ; or mumbling 
sire, 
A scare-crow pattern of old age dressed up 
In all the tatters of infirmity 
All loosely put together, hobbled in, 
Stumping upon a cane with which he smites, 
From time to time, the solid boards, and makes 
them 
Prate somewhat loudly of the whereabout 
Of one so overloaded with his years. 
But what of this ! the laiigh, the grin, grimace, 
The antics striving to outstrip each other, 
Were all received, the least of them not lost, 
With an unmeasured welcome. Through the night, 
Between the show, and many-headed mass 
Of the spectators, and each several nook 
Filled with its fray or brawl, how eagerly 
And with what flashes, as it were, the mind 
Turned this way — that way ! sportive and alert 
And watchful, as a kitten when at play, 
While winds are eddying round her, among straws 

And rustling lea\ es. Enchanting age and sweet ! 
Romantic almost, looked at through a space, 
How small, of intervening years ! For then, 
Though surely no mean progress had been made 
In meditations holy and sublime, 
Yet somebhing of a girlish child-like gloss 
Of novelty survived for scenes like these ; 
Enjoyment haply handed down from times 
When at a country-playhouse, some rude barn 
Tricked out for that proud use, if I perchance 
Caught, on a summer evening through a chink 
In the old wall, an unexpected glimpse 
Of daylight, the bare thought of where I was 
Gladdened me more than if I had been led 
Into a dazzling cavern" of romance, 
Crowded with Genii busy among works 
Not to be looked at by the common sun. 
The matter that detains us now may seem, 
To many, neither dignified enough 
Nor arduous, yet will not be scorned by them, 
Who, looking inward, have observed the ties 
That bind the perishable hours of life 
Each to the other, and the curious props 
By which the world of memory and thought 
Exists and is sustained. More lofty themes, 
Such as at least do wear a prouder face, 
Solicit our regard ; but when I think 
Of these, I feel the imaginative power 
Languish within me ; even then it slept, 
When, pressed by tragic sufferings, the heart 
Was more than full ; amid my sobs and tears 
It slept, even in the pregnant season of youth. 
For though I was most passionately moved 
And yielded to all changes of the scene 
With an obsequious promptness, yet the storm 
Passed not beyond the suburbs of the mind ; 
Save when realities of act and mien, 
The incarnation of the spirits that move 
In harmony amid the Poet's world, 
Rose to ideal grandeur, or, called forth 
By power of contrast, made me recognise, 
As at a glance, the things which I had shaped, 
And yet not shaped, had seen and scarcely seen.. 
When, having closed the mighty Shakspeare's page. 
I mused, and thought, and felt, in solitude. 
Pass we from entertainments, that are such 
Professedly, to others titled higher, 
Yet, in the estimate of youth at least, 
More near akin to those than names imply, — 
I mean the brawls of lawyers in their courts 
Before the ermined judge, or that great stage 
Where senators, tongue-favoured men, perform, 

RESIDENCE IN LONDON. 

Admired and envied. Oh ! the beating heart, 
When one among the prime of these rose up, — 
One, of whose name from childhood we had heard 
Familiarly, a household term, like those, 
The Bedfords, Glosters, Salsburys, of old 
Whom the fifth Harry talks of. Silence ! hush ! 
This is no trifier, no short-flighted wit, 
No stammerer of a minute, painfully 
Delivered. No ! the Orator hath yoked 
The Hours, like young Aurora, to his car : 
Thrice welcome Presence ! how can patience e'er 
Grow weary of attending on a track 
That kindles with such glory ! All are charmed, 
Astonished ; like a hero in romance, 
He winds away his never-ending horn ; 
Words follow words, sense seems to follow sense : 
What memory and what logic ! till the strain 
Transcendent, superhuman as it seemed, 
Grows tedious even in a young man's ear. 
Genius of Burke ! forgive the pen seduced 
By specious wonders, and too slow to tell 
Of what the ingenuous, what bewildered men, 
Beginning to mistrust their boastful guides, 
And wise men, willing to grow wiser, caught, 
Rapt auditors ! from thy most eloquent tongue — 
Now mute, for ever mute in the cold grave. 
I see him, — old, but vigorous in age, — 
Stand like an oak whose stag-horn branches start 
Out of its leafy brow, the more to awe 
The younger brethren of the grove. But some — 
While he forewarns, denounces, launches forth, 
Against all systems built on abstract rights, 
Keen ridicule; the majesty proclaims 
Of Institutes and Laws, hallowed by time ; 
Declares the vital power of social ties 
Endeared by Custom ; and with high disdain, 
Exploding upstart Theory, insists 
Upon the allegiance to which men are born — 
Some — say at once a froward multitude — 
Murmur (for truth is hated, where not loved) 
As the winds fret within the iEolian cave, 
Galled by their monarch's chain. The times were 
big 
With ominous change, which, night by night, pro- 
voked 
Keen struggles, and black clouds of passion raised; 
But memorable moments intervened, 
When Wisdom, like the Goddess from Jove'sbrain, 
Broke forth in armour of resplendent words, 
Startling the Synod. Could a youth, and one 
la ancient story versed, whose breast had heaved 
Under the weight of classic eloquence, 
Sit, see, and hear, unthankful, uninspired ? 

Nor did the Pulpit's oratory fail 
To achieve its higher triumph. Not unfelt 
Were its admonishments, nor lightly heard 
The awful truths delivered thence by tongues 
Endowed with various power to search the soul ; 
Yet ostentation, domineering, offc 
Poured forth harangues, how sadly out of place ! — 
There have I seen a comely bachelor, 
Fresh from a toilette of two hours, ascend 
His rostrum, with seraphic glance look up, 
And, in a tone elaborately low 
Beginning, lead his voice through many a maze 
A minuet course; and, winding up his mouth, 
From time to time, into an orifice 
Most delicate, a lurking eyelet, small, 
And only not invisible, again 
Open it out, diffusing thence a smile 
Of rapt irradiation, exquisite. 
Meanwhile the Evangelists, Isaiah, Job, 
Moses, and he who penned, the other day, 
The Death of Abel, Shakspeare, and the Bard 
Whose genius spangled o'er a gloomy theme 
With fancies thick as his inspiring stars, 
And Ossian (doubt not — 'tis the naked truth) 
Summoned from streamy Morven — each and all 
Would, in their turns, lend ornaments and flowers 
To entwine the crook of eloquence that helped 
This pretty Shepherd, pride of all the plains, 
To rule and guide his captivated flock. 
I glance but at a few conspicuous marks, 
Leaving a thousand others, that, in hall, 
Court, theatre, conventicle, or shop, 
In public room or private, park or street, 
Each fondly reared on his own pedestal, 
Looked out for admiration. Folly, vice, 
Extravagance in gesture, mien, and dress, 
And all the strife of singularity, 
Lies to the ear, and lies to every sense — 
Of these, and of the living shapes they wear, 
There is no end. Such candidates for regard, 
Although well pleased to be where they were 
found, 
I did not hunt after, nor greatly prize, 
Nor made unto myself a secret boast 
Of reading them with quick and curious eye ; 
But, as a common produce, things that are 
To-day, to-morrow will be, took of them 
Such willing note, as, on some errand bound 
That asks not speed, a traveller might bestow 
On sea-shells that bestrew the sandy beach, 
Or daisies swarming through the fields of June. 
But foolishness and madness in parade, 

THE PRELUDE. 

Th'ough most at home in this their clear domain, 
Are scattered everywhere, no rarities, 
Even to the rudest novice of the Schools. 
Me, rather, it employed, to note, and keep 
In memory, those individual sights 
Of courage, or integrity, or truth, 
Or tenderness, which there, set off by foil, 
Appeared more touching. One will I select ; 
A Father— for he bore that sacred name — 
Him saw I, sitting in an open square, 
Upon a corner-stone of that low wall, 
Wherein were fixed the iron pales that fenced 
A spacious grass-plot ; there, in silence, sate 
This One Man, with a sickly babe outstretched 
Upon his knee, whom he had thither brought 
For sunshine, and to breathe the fresher air. 
Of those who passed, and me who looked at him, 
He took no heed ; but in his brawny arms 
(The Artificer was to the elbow bare, 
And from his work this moment had been stolen) 
He held the child, and, bending over it, 
As if he were afraid both of the sun 
And of the air, which he had come to seek, 
Eyed the poor babe with love unutterable. 
As the black storm upon the mountain top 
Sets off the sunbeam in the valley, so 
That huge fermenting mass of human-kind 
Serves as a solemn back-ground, or relief, 
To single forms and objects, whence they draw, 
For feeling and contemplative regard, 
More than inherent liveliness and power. 
How oft, amid those overflowing streets, 
Have I gone forward with the crowd, and said 
Unto myself, " The face of every one 
That passes by me is a mystery ! " 
Thus have I looked, nor ceased to look, oppressed 
By thoughts of what and whither, when and how, 
Until the shapes before my eyes became 
A second-sight procession, such as glides 
Over still mountains, or appears in dreams ; 
And once, far-travelled in such mood, beyond 
The reach of common indication, lost 
Amid the moving pageant, I was smitten 
Abruptly, with the view (a sight not rare) 
Of a blind Beggar, who, with upright face, 
Stood, propped against a wall, upon his chest 
Wearing a written paper, to explain 
His story, whence he came, and who he was. 
Caught by the spectacle my mind turned round 
As with the might of waters ; and apt type 
'A'his label seemed of the utmost we can know, 
Both of ourselves and of the universe ; 
And, on the shape of that unmoving man, 

His steadfast face and sightless eyes, I gazed, 
As if admonished from another world. 
Though reared upon the base of outward things, 
Structures like these the excited spirit mainly 
Builds for herself; scenes different there are, 
Full-formed, that take, with small internal help, 
Possession of the faculties, — the peace 
That comes with night ; the deep solemnity 
Of nature's intermediate hours of rest, 
When the great tide of human life stands still ; 
The business of the day to come, unborn, 
Of that gone by, locked up, as in the grave; 
The blended calmness of the heavens and earth, 
Moonlight and stars, and empty streets, and 
sounds, 
Unfrequent as in deserts ; at late hours 
Of winter evenings, when unwholesome rains 
Are falling hard, with people yet astir, 
The feeble salutation from the voice 
Of some unhappy woman, now and then 
Heard as we pass, when no one looks about, 
Nothing is listened to. But these, I fear, 
Are falsely catalogued ; things that are, are not, 
As the mind answers to them, or the heart 
Is prompt, or slow, to feel. What say you, then, 
To times, when half the city shall break out 
Full of one passion, vengeance, rage, or fear ? 
To executions, to a street on fire, 
Mobs, riots, or rejoicings ? From these sights 
Take one, — that ancient festival, the Fair, 
Holden where martyrs suffered in past time, 
And named of St. Bartholomew ; there, see 
A work completed to our hands, that lays, 
If any spectacle on earth can do, 
The whole creative powers of man asleep ! — 
For once, the Muse's help will we implore, 
And she shall lodge us, wafted on her wings, 
Above the press and danger of the crowd, 
Upon some showman's platform. What a shock 
For eyes and ears ! what anarchy and din, 
Barbarian and infernal, — a phantasma, 
Monstrous in colour, motion, shape, sight, sound ! 
Below, the open space, through every nook 
Of the wide area, twinkles, is alive 
With heads ; the midway region, and above, 
Is thronged with staring pictures and huge scrolls, 
Dumb proclamations of the Prodigies ; 
With chattering monkeys dangling from their 
poles, 
And children whirling in their roundabouts ; 
With those that stretch the neck and strain the 
eyes, 
And crack the voice in rivalship, the crowd 

RESIDENCE IN LONDON". 

 

Inviting ; with buffoons against buffoons 
Grimacing, writhing, screaming, — him who grinds 
The hurdy-gurdy, at the fiddle weaves, 
Rattles the salt-box, thumps the kettle-drum, 
And him who at the trumpet puffs his cheeks, 
The silver-collared Negro with his timbrel, 
Equestrians, tumblers, women, girls, and boys, 
Blue-breeched, pink-vested, with high-towering 
plumes. — 
All moveables of wonder, from all parts, 
i Are here — Albinos, painted Indians, Dwarfs, 
j The Horse of knowledge, and the learned Pig, 
The Stone-eater, the man that swallows fire, 
Giants, Ventriloquists, the Invisible Girl, 
The Bust that speaks and moves its goggling eyes, 
: The Wax-work, Clock-work, all the marvellous 
craft 
■ Of modern Merlins, Wild Beasts, Puppet-shows, 
All out-o'-the way, far-fetched, perverted things, 
All freaks of nature, all Promethean thoughts 
, Of man, his dullness, madness, and their feats 
All jumbled up together, to compose 
|A Parliament of Monsters. Tents and Booths 
Meanwhile, as if the whole were one vast mill, 
Are vomiting, receiving on all sides, 
Men, Women, three-years' Children, Babes in arms. 
I Oh, blank confusion ! true epitome 
Of what the mighty City is herself, 
To thousands upon thousands of her sons, 
■ Living amid the same perpetual whirl 
Of trivial objects, melted and reduced 
'To one identity, by differences 
,'That have no law, no meaning, and no end — ■ 
[Oppression, under which even highest minds 
Must labour, whence the strongest are not free. 
But though the picture weary out the eye, 
By nature an unmanageable sight, 
It is not wholly so to him who looks 

In steadiness, who hath among least things 
An under-sense of greatest ; sees the parts 
As parts, but with a feeling of the whole. 
This, of all acquisitions, first awaits 
On sundry and most widely different modes 
Of education, nor with least delight 
Onthatthroughwhichlpassed. Attention springs, 
And comprehensiveness and memory flow. 
From early converse with the works of God 
Among all regions ; chiefly where appear 
Most obviously simplicity and power. 
Think, how the everlasting streams and woods, 
Stretched and still stretching far and wide, exalt 
The roving Indian, on his desert sands : 
What grandeur not unfelt, what pregnant show 
Of beauty, meets the sun-burnt Arab's eye : 
And, as the sea propels, from zone to zone, 
Its currents ; magnifies its shoals of life 
Beyond all compass ; spreads, and sends aloft 
Armies of clouds, — even so, its powers and aspects 
Shape for mankind, by principles as fixed, 
The views and aspirations of the soul 
To majesty. Like virtue have the forms 
Perennial of the ancient hills ; nor less 
The changeful language of their countenances 
Quickens the slumbering mind, and aids the 
thoughts, 
However multitudinous, to move 
With order and relation. This, if still, 
As hitherto, in freedom I may speak, 
Not violating any just restraint, 
As may be hoped, of real modesty, — 
This did I feel, in London's vast domain. 
The Spirit of Nature was upon me there ; 
The soul of Beauty and enduring Life 
Vouchsafed her inspiration, and diffused, 
Through meagre lines and colours, and the press 
Of self-destroying, transitory things, 
Composure, and ennobling Harmony. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

BOOK EIGHTH. 

RETROSPECT.— LOVE OF NATURE 
LEADING TO LOVE OF MAN. 
What sounds are those, Helvellyn, that are heard 
Up to thy summit, through the depth of air 
Ascending, as if distance had the power 
To make the sounds more audible  What crowd 
Covers, or sprinkles o'er, yon village green ] 
Crowd seems it, solitary hill ! to thee, 
Though but a little family of men, 
Shepherds and tillers of the ground — betimes 
Assembled with their children and their wives, 
And here and there a stranger iuterspersed. 
They hold a rustic fair — a festival, 
Such as, on this side now, and now on that, 
Repeated through his tributary vales, 
Helvellyn, in the silence of his rest, 
Sees annually, if clouds towards either ocean 
Blown from their favourite resting-place, or mists 
Dissolved, have left him an unshrouded head. 
Delightful day it is for all who dwell 
In this secluded glen, and eagerly 
They give it welcome. Long ere heat of noon, 
From byre or field the kine were brought ; the 

Are penned in cotes ; the chaffering is begun. 
The heifer lows, uneasy at the voice 
Of a new master; bleat the flocks aloud. 
Booths are there none ; a stall or two is here ; 
A lame man or a blind, the one to beg, 
The other to make music ; hither, too, 
From far, with basket, slung upon her arm, 
Of hawker's wares — books, pictures, combs, and 
pins — 
Some aged woman finds her way again, 
Year after year, a punctual visitant ! 
There also stands a speech-maker by rote, 
Pulling the strings of his boxed raree-show; 
And in the lapse of many years may come 
Prouder itinerant, mountebank, or he 
Whose wonders in a covered wain lie hid. 
But one there is, the loveliest of them all, 
Some sweet lass of the valley, looking out 
For gains, and who that sees her would not buy? 
Fruits of her father's orchard, are her wares, 
And with the ruddy produce, she walks round 
Among the crowd, half pleased with, half ashamed 

Of her new office, blushing restlessly. 
The children now are rich, for the old to-day 
Are generous as the young ; and, if content 
With looking on, some ancient wedded pair 
Sit in the shade together, while they gaze, 
"A cheerful smile unbends the wrinkled brow, 
The days departed start again to life, 
And all the scenes of childhood reappear, 
Faint, but more tranquil, like the changing sun 
To him who slept at noon and wakes at eve." 
Thus gaiety and cheerfulness prevail, 
Spreading from young to old, from old to young, 
And no one seems to want his share. — Immense 
Is the recess, the circumambient world 
Magnificent, by which they are embraced : 
They move about upon the soft green turf: 
How little they, they and their doings, seem, 
And all that they can further or obstruct ! 
Through utter weakness pitiably dear, 
As tender infants are : and yet how great ! 
For all things serve them : them the morning light 
Loves, as it glistens on the silent rocks ; 
And them the silent rocks, which now from high 
Look down upon them ; the reposing clouds; 
The wild brooks prattling from invisible haunts ; 
And old Helvellyn, conscious of the stir 
Which animates this day their calm abode. 
With deep devotion, Nature, did I feel, 
In that enormous City's turbulent world 
Of men and things, what benefit I owed 
To thee, and those domains of rural peace, 
"Where to the sense of beauty first my heart 
Was opened ; tract more exquisitely fair 
Than that famed paradise of ten thousand trees, 
Or Gehol's matchless gardens, for delight 
Of the Tartarian dynasty composed 
(Beyond that mighty wall, not fabulous, 
China's stupendous mound) by patient toil 
Of myriads and boon nature's lavish help ; 
There, in a clime from widest empire chosen, 
Fulfilling (could enchantment have done more ?) 
A sumptuous dream of flowery lawns, with domes 
Of pleasure sprinkled over, shady dells 

 These lines are from a descriptive Poem— " Malvern 
Hills "—by one of Mr. "Wordsworth's oldest friends, Mr. 
Joseph Cottle. — Ed. 

EETEOSPECT. 

 

For eastern monasteries, sunny mounts 
j With temples crested, bridges, gondolas, 
Eocks, dens, and groves of foliage taught to melt 
Into each other their obsequious hues, 
Vanished and vanishing in subtle chase, 
Too fine to be pursued ; or standing forth 
 In no discordant opposition, strong 
And gorgeous as the colours side by side 
Bedded among rich plumes of tropic birds ; 
, And mountains over all, embracing all; 
And all the landscape, endlessly enriched 
With waters running, falling, or asleep. 
But lovelier far than this, the paradise 
- Where I was reared ; in Nature's primitive gifts 
Favoured no less, and more to evgry sense 
Delicious, seeing that the sun and sky, 
 The elements, and seasons as they change, 
Do find a worthy fellow-labourer there — 
Man free, man working for himself, with choice 
Of time, and place, and object; by his wants, 
His comforts, native occupations, cares, 
i Cheerfully led to individual ends 
Or social, and still followed by a train 
Unwooed, unthought-of even — simplicity, 
And beauty, and inevitable grace. 
Yea, when a glimpse of those imperial bowers 
Would to a child be transport over-great, 
• When but a half-hour's roam through such a place 
Would leave behind a dance of images, 
. That shall break in upon his sleep for weeks ; 
i Even then the common haunts of the green earth, 
And ordinary interests of man, 
'Which they embosom, all without regard 
As both may seem, are fastening on the heart 
Insensibly, each with the other's help. 
For me, when my affections first were led 
' From kindred, friends, and playmates, to partake 
Love for the human creature's absolute self, 
That noticeable kindliness of heart 
Sprang out of fountains, there abounding most, 
.Where sovereign Nature dictated the tasks 
• And occupations which her beauty adorned, 
And Shepherds were the men that pleased me 
first ; 
Not such as Saturn ruled 'mid Latian wilds, 
With arts and laws so tempered, that their lives 
Left, even to us toiling in this late day, 
|A bright tradition of the golden age ; 
►Not such as, 'mid Arcadian fastnesses 
Sequestered, handed down among themselves 
j Felicity, in Grecian song renowned; 
iNor such as — when an adverse fate had driven, 

From house and home, the courtly band whose 
fortunes 
Entered, with Shakspeare's genius, the wild woods 
Of Arden — amid sunshine or in shade 
Culled the best fruits of Time's uncounted hours, 
Ere Phoebe sighed for the false Ganymede ; 
Or there where Perdita and Florizel 
Together danced, Queen of the feast, and King ; 
Nor such as Spenser fabled. True it is, 
That I had heard (what he perhaps had seen) 
Of maids at sunrise bringing in from far 
Their May-bush, and along the streets in flocks 
Parading with a song of taunting rhymes, 
Aimed at the laggards slumbering within doors ; 
Had also heard, from those who yet remembered, 
Tales of the May-pole dance, and wreaths that 
decked 
Porch, door- way, or kirk-pillar; and of youths, 
Each with his maid, before the sun was up, 
By anmial custom, issuing forth in troops, 
To drink the waters of some sainted well, 
And hang it round with garlands. Love survives ; 
But, for such purpose, flowers no longer grow : 
The times, too sage, perhaps too proud, have 
dropped 
These lighter graces ; and the rural ways 
And manners which my childhood looked upon 
Were the unluxuriant produce of a life 
Intent on little but substantial needs, 
Yet rich in beauty, beauty that was felt. 
But images of danger and distress, 
Man suffering among awful Powers and Forms ; 
Of this I heard, and saw enough to make 
Imagination restless ; nor was free 
Myself from frequent perils ; nor were tales 
Wanting, — the tragedies of former times, 
Hazards and strange escapes, of which the rocks 
Immutable, and everflowing streams, 
Where'er I roamed, were speaking monuments. 
Smooth life had flock and shepherd in old time, 
Long springs and tepid winters, on the banks 
Of delicate Galesus ; and no less 
Those scattered along Adria' myrtle shores : 
Smooth life had herdsman, and his snow-white 
herd 
To triumphs and to sacrificial rites 
Devoted, on the inviolable stream 
Of rich Clitumnus ; and the goat-herd lived 
As calmly, underneath the pleasant brows 
Of cool Lucretilis, where the pipe was heard 
Of Pan, Invisible God, thrilling the rocks 
With tutelary music, from all harm 
The fold protecting. I myself, mature 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

In manhood then, have seen a pastoral tract 
Like one of these, where Fancy might run wild, 
Though under skies less generous, less serene : 
There, for her own delight had Nature framed 
A pleasure-ground, diffused a fair expanse 
Of level pasture, islanded with grove 
And hanked with woody risings ; but the Plain 
Endless, here opening widely out, and there 
Shut up in lesser lakes or beds of lawn 
And intricate recesses, creek or bay 
Sheltered within a shelter, where at large 
The shepherd strays, a rolling hut his home. 
Thither he comes with spring-time, there abides 
All summer, and at sunrise ye may hear 
His flageolet to liquid notes of love 
Attuned, or sprightly fife resounding far. 
Nook is there none, nor tract of that vast space 
Where passage opens, but the same shall have 
In turn its visitant, telling there his hours 
In unlaborious pleasure, with no task 
More toilsome than to carve a beechen bowl 
For spring or fountain, which the traveller finds, 
When through the region he pursues at will 
His devious course. A glimpse of such sweet life 
I saw when, from the melancholy walls 
Of Goslar, once imperial, I renewed 
My daily walk along that wide champaign, 
That, reaching to her gates, spreads east and west, 
And northwards, from beneath the mountainous 
verge 
Of the Hercynian forest. Yet, hail to you 
Moors, mountains, headlands, and ye hollow vales, 
Ye long deep channels for the Atlantic's voice, 
Powers of my native region ! Ye that seize 
The heart with firmer grasp ! Your snows and 
streams 
Ungovernable, and your terrifying winds, 
That howl so dismally for him who treads 
Companionless your awful solitudes ! 
There, 'tis the shepherd's task the winter long 
To wait upon the storms : of their approach 
Sagacious, into sheltering coves he drives 
His flock, and thither from the homestead bears 
A toilsome burden up the craggy ways, 
And deals it out, their regular nourishment 
Strewn on the frozen snow. And when the spring 
Looks out, and all the pastures dance with lambs, 
And when the flock, with warmer weather, climbs 
Higher and higher, him his office leads 
To watch their goings, whatsoever track 
The wanderers choose. For this he quits his home 
At day-spring, and no sooner doth the sun 
Begin to strike him with a fire- like heat, 
Than he lies down upon some shining rock, 

And breakfasts with his dog. When they have 
stolen, 
As is their wont, a pittance from strict time, 
For rest not needed or exchange of love, 
Then from his couch he starts ; and now his feet 
Crush out a livelier fragrance from the flowers 
Of lowly thyme, by Nature's skill enwrought 
In the wild turf: the lingering dews of morn 
Smoke round him, as from hill to hill he hies, 
His staff protending like a hunter's spear, 
Or by its aid leaping from crag to crag, 
And o'er the brawling beds of unbridged streams. 
Philosophy, methinks, at Fancy s call, 
Might deign to follow him through what he does 
Or sees in his day's march ; himself he feels, 
In those vast regions where his service lies, 
A freeman, wedded to his life of hope 
And hazard, and hard labour interchanged 
With that majestic indolence so dear 
To native man. A rambling school-boy, thus 
I felt his presence in his own domain, 
As of a lord and master, or a power, 
Or genius, under Nature, under God, 
Presiding ; and severest solitude 
Had more commanding looks when he was there. 
When up the lonely brooks on rainy days 
Angling I went, or trod the trackless hills 
By mists bewildered, suddenly mine eyes 
Have glanced upon him distant a few steps, 
In size a giant, stalking through thick fog, 
His sheep like Greenland bears ; or, as he stepped 
Beyond the boundary line of some hill-shadow, 
His form hath flashed upon me, glorified 
By the deep radiance of the setting sun : 
Or him have I descried in distant sky, 
A solitary object and sublime, 
Above all height ! like an aerial cross 
Stationed alone upon a spiry rock 
Of the Chartreuse, for worship. Thus was man 
Ennobled outwardly before my sight, 
And thus my heart was early introduced 
To an unconscious love and reverence 
Of human nature ; hence the human form 
To me became an index of delight, 
Of grace and honour, power and worthiness. 
Meanwhile this creature — spiritual almost 
As those of books, but more exalted far ; 
Far more of an imaginative form 
Than the gay Corin of the groves, who lives 
For his own fancies, or to dance by the hour, 
In coronal, with Phyllis in the midst — 
Was, for the purposes of kind, a man 
With the most common; husband, father; learned, 
Could teach, admonish ; suffered with the rest 

RETROSPECT. 

 

' From vice and folly, wretchedness and fear ; 
 Of this I little saw, cared less for it, 
But something must have felt. 
Call ye these appearances — 
Which I beheld of shepherds in my youth, 
This sanctity of Nature given to man — 
A shadow, a delusion, ye who pore 
On the dead letter, miss the spirit of things ; 
Whose truth is not a motion or a shape 
: Instinct with vital functions, but a block 
: Or waxen image which yourselves have made, 
And ye adore ! But blessed be the God 
Of Nature and of Man that this wa so ; 
That men before my inexperienced eyes 
Did first present themselves thus purified, 
Kemoved, and to a distance that was fit : 
And so we all of us in some degree 
Are led to knowledge, wheresoever led, 
And howsoever ; were it otherwise, 
And we found evil fast as we find good 
In our first years, or think that it is found, 
] How could the innocent heart bear up and live ! 
 But doubly fortunate my lot ; not here 
Alone, that something of a better life 
' Perhaps was round me than it is the privilege 
Of most to move in, but that first I looked 
 At Man through objects that were great or fair ; 
' First communed with him by their help. And thus 
Was founded a sure safeguard and defence 
', Against the weight of meanness, selfish cares, 
Coarse manners, vulgar passions, that beat in 
■ On all sides from the ordinary world 
 In which we traffic. Starting from this point 
I had my face turned toward the truth, began 
With an advantage furnished by that kind 
Of prepossession, without which the soul 
Receives no knowledge that can bring forth good, 
No genuine insight ever comes to her. 
From the restraint of over-watchful eyes 
Preserved, I moved about, year after year, 
Happy, and now most thankful that my walk 
Was guarded from too early intercourse 
With the deformities of crowded life, 
' And those ensuing laughters and contempts, 
Self-pleasing, which, if we would wish to think 
| With a due reverence on earth's rightful lord, 
i Here placed to be the inheritor of heaven, 
Will not permit us ; but pursue the mind, 
I That to devotion willingly would rise, 
! Into the temple and the temple's heart. 
Yet deem not, Friend ! that human kind with me 
Thus early took a place pre-eminent ; 
I Nature herself was, at this unripe time, 

But secondary to my own pursuits 
And animal activities, and all 
Their trivial pleasures; and when these had 
drooped 
And gradually expired, and Nature, prized 
For her own sake, became my joy, even then — 
And upwards through late youth, until not less 
Than two-and-twenty summers had been told — 
Was Man in my affections and regards 
Subordinate to her, her visible forms 
And viewless agencies : a passion, she, 
A rapture often, and immediate love 
Ever at hand ; he, only a delight 
Occasional, an accidental grace, 
His hour being not yet come. Far less had then 
The inferior creatures, beast or bird, attuned 
My spirit to that gentleness of love 
(Though they had long been carefully observed), 
Won from me those minute obeisances 
Of tenderness, which I may number now 
With my first blessings. Nevertheless, on these 
The light of beauty did not fall in vain, 
Or gi-andeur circumfuse them to no end. 
But when that first poetic faculty 
Of plain Imagination and severe, 
No longer a mute influence of the soul, 
Ventured, at some rash Muse's earnest call, 
To try her strength among harmonious words ; 
And to book-notions and the rules of art 
Did knowingly conform itself ; there came 
Among the simple shapes of human life 
A wilfulness of fancy and conceit ; 
And Nature and her objects beautified 
These fictions, as in some sort, in their turn, 
They burnished her. From touch of this new power 
Nothing was safe : the elder-tree that grew 
Beside the well-known charnel-house had then 
A dismal look : the yew-tree had its ghost, 
That took his station there for ornament : 
The dignities of plain occurrence then 
Were tasteless, and truth's golden mean, a point 
Where no sufficient pleasure could be found. 
Then, if a widow, staggering with the blow 
Of her distress, was known to have turned her 
steps 
To the cold grave in which her husband slept, 
One night, or haply more than one, through pain 
Or half-insensate impotence of mind, 
The fact was caught at greedily, and there 
She must be visitant the whole year through, 
Wetting the turf with never-ending tears. 
Through quaint obliquities I might pursue 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

These cravings ; when the fox-glove, one by one, 
Upwards through every stage of the tall stem, 
Had shed beside the public way its bells, 
And stood of all dismantled, save the last 
Left at the tapering ladder's top, that seemed 
To bend as doth a slender blade of grass 
Tipped with a rain-drop, Fancy loved to seat, 
Beneath the plant despoiled, but crested still 
With this last relic, soon ibself to fall, 
Some vagrant mother, whose arch little ones, 
All unconcerned by her dejected plight, 
Laughed as with rival eagerness their hands 
Gathered the purple cups that round them lay, 
Strewing the turf's green slope. 
A diamond light 
(Whene'er the summer sun, declining, smote 
A smooth rock wet with constant springs) was 
seen 
Sparkling from out a copse-clad bank that rose 
Fronting our cottage. Oft beside the hearth 
Seated, with open door, often and long 
Upon this restless lustre have I gazed, 
That made my fancy restless as itself. 
'Twas now for me a bui'nished silver shield 
Suspended over a knight's tomb, who lay 
Inglorious, buried in the dusky wood : 
An entrance now into some magic cave 
Or palace built by fairies of the rock ; 
Nor could I have been bribed to disenchant 
The spectacle, by visiting the spot. 
Thus wilful Fancy, in no hurtful mood, 
Engrafted far-fetched shapes on feelings bred 
By pure Imagination : busy Power 
She was, and with her ready pupil turned 
Instinctively to human passions, then 
Least understood. Yet, 'mid the fervent swarm 
Of these vagaries, with an eye so rich 
As mine was through the bounty of a grand 
And lovely region, I had forms distinct 
To steady me : each airy thought revolved 
Round a substantial centre, which at once 
Incited it to motion, and controlled. 
I did not pine like one in cities bred, 
As was thy melancholy lot, dear Friend ! 
Great Spirit as thou art, in endless dreams 
Of sickliness, disjoining, joining, things 
Without the light of knowledge. Where the harm, 
If, when the woodman languished with disease 
Iriduced by sleeping nightly on the ground 
Within his sod-built cabin, Indian-wise, 
I called the pangs of disappointed love, 
And all the sad etcetera of the wrong, 
To help him to his grave. Meanwhile the man, 
If not already from the woods retired 

To die at home, was haply as I knew, 
Withering by slow degrees, 'mid gentle airs, 
Birds, running streams, and hills so beautiful 
On golden evenings, while the charcoal pile 
Breathed up its smoke, an image of his ghost 
Or spirit that full soon must take her flight. 
Nor shall we not be tending towards that point 
Of sound humanity to which our Tale 
Leads, though by sinuous ways, if here I shew 
How Fancy, in a season when she wove 
Those slender cords, to guide the unconscious Boy 
For the Man's sake, could feed at Nature's call 
Some pensive musings which might well beseem 
Maturer years. 
A grove there is whose bougha 
Stretch from the western marge of Thurston-mere, 
With length of shade so thick, that whoso glides 
Along the line of low-roofed water, moves 
As in a cloister. Once — while, in that shade 
Loitering, I watched the golden beams of light 
Flung from the setting sun, as they reposed 
In silent beauty on the naked ridge 
Of a high eastern hill — thus flowed my thoughts 
In a pure stream of words fresh from the heart: 
 Dear native Regions, wheresoe'er shall close 
My mortal course, there will I think on you ; 
Dying, will cast on you a backward look ; 
Even as this setting sun (albeit the Vale 
Is no where touched by one memorial gleam) 
Doth with the fond remains of his last power 
Still linger, and a farewell lustre sheds 
On the dear mountain-tops where first he rose. 
Enough of humble arguments ; recal, 
My Song ! those high emotions which thy voice 
Has heretofore made known. ; that bursting forth 
Of sympathy, inspiring and inspired, 
When everywhere a vital pulse was felt, 
And all the several frames of things, like stars, 
Through every magnitude distinguishable, 
Shone mutually indebted, or half lost 
Each in the other's blaze, a galaxy 
Of life and glory. In the midst stood Man, 
Outwardly, inwardly contemplated, 
As, of all visible natures, crown, though bora 
Of dust, and kindred to the worm ; a Being, 
Both in perception and discernment, first 
In every capability of rapture, 
Through the divine effect of power and love ; 
As, more than anything we know, instinct 
With godhead, and, by reason and by will, 
Acknowledging dependency sublime. 

See p. .— Ed. 

RETROSPECT. 

 

Ere long, the lonely mountains left, I moved, 
ie<>ii't, from day to day, with temporal shapes 
)f vice and folly thrust upon my view, 
Objects of sport, and ridicule, and scorn, 
■lanners and characters discriminate, 
\.nd little bustling passions that eclipse, 
Ls well they might, the impersonated thought, 
?he idea, or abstraction of the kind. 
An idler among academic bowers, 
iuch was my new condition, as at large 
las been set forth ; yet here the vulgar light 
)f present, actual, superficial life, 
learning through colouring of other times, 
 )ld usages and local privilege, 
•Yas welcomed, softened, if not solemnised. 
?his notwithstanding, being brought more near 
n o vice and guilt, forerunning wretchedness, 
trembled, — thought, at times, of human life 
Vith an indefinite terror and dismay, 
■uch as the storms and angry elements 
lad bred in me ; but gloomier far, a dim 
Lnalogy to uproar and misrule, 
)isqaiet, danger, and obscurity. 
' It might be told (but wherefore speak of things 
ommon to all ) that, seeing, I was led 
•rravely to ponder — judging between good 
.nd evil, not as for the mind's delight 
•ut for her guidance — one who was to act, 
.s sometimes to the best of feeble means 
did, by human sympathy impelled : 
nd, through dislike and most offensive pain, 
r^as to the truth conducted ; of this faith 
 ever forsaken, that, by acting well, 
nd understanding, I should learn to love 
lie end of life, and everything we know. 
' Grave Teacher, stern Preceptress ! for at times 
hou canst put on an aspect most severe ; 
ondon, to thee I willingly return, 
rewhile my verse played idly with the flowers 
n wrought upon thy mantle ; satisfied 
''ith that amusement, and a simple look 
•f child-like inquisition now and then 
( ist upwards on thy countenance, to detect 
une inner meanings which might harbour there, 
'.it how could I in mood so light indulge, 
:eepiug such fresh remembrance of the day, 
j'hen, having thridded the long labyrinth 
If the suburban villages, I first 
'utered thy vast dominion 'I On the roof 
("' an itinerant vehicle I sate, 
I j ith vulgar men about me, trivial forms 

Of houses, pavement, streets, of men and things, — 
Mean shapes on every side : but, at the instant, 
When to myself it fairly might be said, 
The threshold now is overpast, (how strange 
That aught external to the living mind 
Should have such mighty sway ! yet so it was), 
A weight of ages did at once descend 
Upon my heart ; no thought embodied, no 
Distinct remembrances, but weight and power, — - 
Power growing under weight : alas ! I feel 
That I am trifling : 'twas a moment's pause, — 
All that took place within me came and went 
As in a moment; yet with Time it dwells, 
And grateful memory, as a thing divine. 
The curious traveller, who, from open day, 
Hath passed with torches into some huge cave, 
The Grotto of Antiparos, or the Den 
In old time haunted by that Danish Witch, 
Yordas ; he looks around and sees the vault 
Widening on all sides ; sees, or thinks he sees, 
Erelong, the massy roof above his head, 
That instantly unsettles and recedes, — 
Substance and shadow, light and darkness, all 
Commingled, making up a canopy 
Of shapes and forms and tendencies to shape 
That shift and vanish, change and interchange 
Like spectres, — ferment silent and sublime ! 
That after a short space works less and less, 
Till, every effort, every motion gone, 
The scene before him stands in perfect view 
Exposed, and lifeless as a written book ! — 
But let him pause awhile, and look again, 
And a new quickening shall succeed, at first 
Beginning timidly, then creeping fast, 
Till the whole cave, so late a senseless mass, 
Busies the eye with images and forms 
Boldly assembled, — here is shadowed forth 
From the projections, wrinkles, cavities, 
A variegated landscape, — there the shape 
Of some gigantic warrior clad in mail, 
The ghostly semblance of a hooded monk, 
Veiled nun, or pilgrim resting on his staff : 
Strange congregation ! yet not slow to meet 
Eyes that perceive through minds that can in- 
spire. 
Even in such sort had I at first been moved, 
Nor otherwise continued to be moved, 
As I explored the vast metropolis, 
Fount of my country's destiny and the world's ; 
That great emporium, chronicle at once 
And burial-place of passions, and their home 
Imperial, their chief living residence. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

"With strong sensations teeming as it did 
Of past and present, such a place must needs 
Have pleased me, seeking knowledge at that time 
Far less than craving power ; yet knowledge came, 
Sought or unsought, and influxes of power 
Came, of themselves, or at her call derived 
In fits of kindliest apprehensiveness, 
From all sides, when whate'er was in itself 
Capacious found, or seemed to find, in me 
A correspondent amplitude of mind ; 
Such is the strength and glory of our youth ! 
The human nature unto which I felt 
That I belonged, and reverenced with love, 
Was not a punctual presence, but a spirit 
Diffused through time and space, with aid derived 
Of evidence from monuments, erect, 
Prostrate, or leaning towards their common rest 
In earth, the widely scattered wreck sublime 
Of vanished nations, or more clearly drawn 
From books and what they picture and record. 
'Tis true, the history of our native land, 
With those of Greece compared and popular Rome, 
And in our high-wrought modern narratives 
Stript of their harmonising soul, the life 
Of manners and familiar incidents, 
Had never much delighted me. And less 
Than other intellects had mine been used 
Tq lean upon extrinsic circumstance 
Of record or tradition ; but a sense 
Of what in the Great City had been done 
And suffered, and was doing, suffering, still, 
Weighed with me, could support the test of 
thought ; 
And, in despite of all that had gone by, 
Or was departing never to return, 
There I conversed with majesty and power 
Like independent natures. Hence the place 
Was thronged with impregnations like the Wilds 
In which my early feelings had been nursed — 
Bare hills and valleys, full of caverns, rocks, 
And audible seclusions, dashing lakes, 
Echoes and waterfalls, and pointed crags 
That into music touch the passing wind. 
Here then my young imagination found 
No uncongenial element ; could here 
Among new objects serve or give command, 
Even as the heart's occasions might require, 

To forward reason's else too-scrupulous march. 
The effect was, still more elevated views 
Of human nature. Neither vice nor guilt, 
Debasement undergone by body or mind, 
Nor all the misery forced upon my sight, 
Misery not lightly passed, but sometimes scannec 
Most feelingly, could overthrow my trust 
In what we may become ; induce belief 
That I was ignorant, had been falsely taught, 
A solitary, who with vain conceits 
Had been inspired, and walked about in dreams. 
From those sad scenes when meditation turned, 
Lo ! every thing that was indeed divine 
Retained its purity inviolate, 
Nay brighter shone, by this portentous gloom 
Set off; such opposition as aroused 
The mind of Adam, yet in Paradise 
Though fallen from bliss, when in the East he Baw 
 Darkness ere day's mid course, and morning light 
More orient in the western cloud, that drew 
O'er the blue firmament a radiant white, 
Descending slow withsomething heavenly fraught. 
Add also, that among the multitudes 
Of that huge city, oftentimes was seen 
Affectingly set forth, more than elsewhere 
Is possible, the unity of man, 
One spirit over ignorance and vice 
Predominant, in good and evil hearts ; 
One sense for moral judgments, as one eye 
For the sun's light. The soul when smitten thus 
By a sublime idea, whencesoe'er 
Vouchsafed for union or communion, feeds 
On the pure bliss, and takes her rest with God. 
Thus from a very early age, Friend ! 
My thoughts by slow gradations had been drawn 
To human-kind, and to the good and ill 
Of human life : Nature had led me on ; 
And oft amid the " busy hum" I seemed 
To travel independent of her help, 
As if I had forgotten her ; but no, 
The world of human-kind outweighed not hers 
In my habitual thoughts ; the scale of love. 
Though filling daily, still was light, compared 
With that in which her mighty objects lay. 



From Milton, Par. Lost, xi. .— Ed. 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

BOOK NINTH. 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 
Even as a river, — partly (it might seem) 
Yielding to old remembrances, and swayed 
In part by fear to shape a way direct, 
That would engulph bim soon in the ravenous sea — 
Turns, and will measure back his course, far back, 
Seeking the very regions which he crossed 
In his first outset ; so have we, my Friend ! 
Turned and returned with intricate delay. 
i Or as a traveller, who has gained the brow 
' Of some aerial Down, while there he halts 
For breathing-time, is tempted to review 
i The region left behind him ; and, if aught 
I Deserving notice have escaped regard, 
Or been regarded with too careless eye, 
Strives, from that height, with one and yet one 
more 
Last look, to make the best amends he may : 
iSo have we lingered. Now we start afresh 
iWith courage, and new hope risen on our toil. 
Fair greetings to this shapeless eagerness, 
■Whene'er it comes ! needful in work so Ions:, 
I ■ 
Thrice needful to the argument which now 
A. waits us ! Oh, how much unlike the past ! 
Free as a colt at pasture on the hill, 
il ranged at large, through London's wide domain, 
Month after month. Obscurely did I live, 
Not seeking frequent intercourse with men, 
By literature, or elegance, or rank, 
jDistinguished. Scarcely was a year thus spent 
iEre I forsook the crowded solitude, 
i With less regret for its luxurious pomp, 
j And all the nicely -guarded shows of art, 
Than for the humble book-stalls in the streets, 
(Exposed to eye and hand where'er I turned. 
France lured me forth ; the realm that I had 
crossed 
'jo lately, journeying toward the snow-clad Alps. 
ut now, relinquishing the scrip and staff, 
^.nd all enjoyment which the summer sun 
iheds round the steps of those who meet the day 
'Vith motion constant as his own, I went 
i repared to sojourn in a pleasant town, 
'Vashed by the current of the stately Loire. 

Through Paris lay my readiest course, and there 
Sojourning a few days, I visited 
In haste, each spot of old or recent fame, 
The latter chiefly ; from the field of Mars 
Down to the suburbs of St. Antony, 
And from Mont Martyr southward to the Dome 
Of Genevieve. In both her clamorous Halls, 
The National Synod and the Jacobins, 
I saw the Revolutionary Power 
Toss like a ship at anchor, rocked by storms ; 
The Arcades I traversed, in the Palace huge 
Of Orleans ; coasted round and round the line 
Of Tavern, Brothel, Gaming-house, and Shop, 
Great rendezvous of worst and best, the walk 
Of all who had a purpose, or had not ; 
I stared and listened, with a sti'anger's ears, 
To Hawkers and Haranguers, hubbub wild! 
And hissing Factionists with ardent eyes, 
In knots, or pairs, or single. Not a look 
Hope takes, or Doubt or Fear is forced to wear, 
But seemed there present; and I scanned them all, 
Watched every gesture uncontrollable, 
Of anger, and vexation, and despite, 
All side by side, and struggling face to face, 
With gaiety and dissolute idleness. 
Where silent zephyrs sported with the dust 
Of the Bastille, I sate in the open sun, 
And from the rubbish gathered up a stone, 
And pocketed the relic, in the guise 
Of an enthusiast ; yet, in honest truth, 
I looked for something that I could not find, 
Affecting more emotion than I felt ; 
For 'tis most certain, that these various sights, 
However potent their first shock, with me 
Appeared to recompense the traveller's pains 
Less than the painted Magdalene of Le Brun, 
A beauty exquisitely wrought, with hair 
Dishevelled, gleaming eyes, and rueful cheek 
Pale and bedropped with overflowing tears. 
But hence to my more permanent abode 
I hasten ; there, by novelties in speech, 
Domestic manners, customs, gestures, looks, 
And all the attire of ordinary life, 
Attention was engrossed ; and, thus amused, 
I stood 'mid those concussions, unconcerned, 
Tranquil almost, and careless as a flower 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Glassed in a green-house, or a parlour shrub 
That spreads its leaves in unmolested peace, 
While every bush and tree, the country through, 
Is shaking to the roots : indifference this 
Which may seem strange : but I was unprepared 
With needful knowledge, had abruptly passed 
Into a theatre, whose stage was filled 
And busy with an action far advanced. 
Like others, I had skimmed, and sometimes read 
With care, the master pamphlets of the day ; 
Nor wanted such half-insight as grew wild 
Upon that meagre soil, helped out by talk 
And public news ; but having never seen 
A chronicle that might suffice to show 
Whence the main organs of the public power 
Had sprung, their transmigrations, when and how 
Accomplished, giving thus unto events 
A form and body ; all things were to me 
Loose and disjointed, and the affections left 
Without a vital interest. At that time, 
Moreover, the first storm was overblown, 
And the strong hand of outward violence 
Locked up in quiet. For myself, I fear 
Now in connection with so great a theme 
To speak (as I must be compelled to do) 
Of one so unimportant ; night by night 
Did I frequent the formal haunts of men, 
Whom, in the city, privilege of birth 
Sequestered from the rest, societies 
Polished in arts, and in punctilio versed ; 
Whence, and from deeper causes, all discourse 
Of good and evil of the time was shunned 
With scrupulous care ; but these restrictions soon 
Proved tedious, and I gradually withdrew 
Into a noisier world, and thus ere long 
Became a patriot ; and my heart was all 
Given to the people, and my love was theirs. 
A band of military Officers, 
Then stationed in the city, were the chief 
Of my associates : some of these wore swords 
That had been seasoned in the wars, and all 
Were men well-born ; the chivalry of France. 
In age and temper differing, they had yet 
One spirit ruling in each heart ; alike 
(Save only one, hereafter to be named) 
Were bent upon undoing what was done : 
This was their rest and only hope ; therewith 
No fear had they of bad becoming worse, 
For worst to them was come ; nor would have 
stirred, 
Or deemed it worth a moment's thought to stir, 
In any thing, save only as the act 
Looked thitherward. One, reckoning by years, 

Was in the prime of manhood, and erewhile 
He had sate lord in many tender hearts ; 
Though heedless of such honours now, and 
changed : 
His temper was quite mastered by the times, 
And they had blighted him, had eaten away 
The beauty of his person, doing wrong 
Alike to body and to mind : his port, 
Which once had been erect and open, now 
Was stooping and contracted, and a face, 
Endowed by Nature with her fairest gifts 
Of symmetry and light and bloom, expressed, 
As much as any that was ever seen, 
A ravage out of season, made by thoughts 
Unhealthy and vexatious. With the hour, 
That from the press of Paris duly brought 
Its freight of public news, the fever came, 
A punctual visitant, to shake this man, 
Disarmed his voice and fanned his yellow cheek 
Into a thousand colours ; while he read, 
Or mused, his Sword was haunted by his touch 
Continually, like an uneasy place 
In his own body. 'Twas in truth an hour 
Of universal ferment ; mildest men 
Were agitated ; and commotions, strife 
Of passion and opinion, filled the walls 
Of peaceful houses with unquiet sounds. 
The soil of common life, was, at that time, 
Too hot to tread upon. Oft said I then, 
And not then only, " What a mockery this 
Of history, the past and that to come ! 
Now do I feel how all men are deceived, 
Reading of nations and their works, in faith, 
Faith given to vanity and emptiness ; 
Oh ! laughter for the page that would reflect 
To future times the face of what now is ! " 
The land all swarmed with passion, like a plain 
Devoured by locusts, — Carra, Gorsas, — add 
A hundred other names, forgotten now, 
Nor to be heard of more ; yet, they were powers 
Like eai'thquakes, shocks repeated day by day, 
And felt through every nook of town and field. 
Such was the state of things. Meanwhile the chiel 
Of my associates stood prepared for flight 
To augment the band of emigrants in arms 
Upon the borders of the Rhine, and leagued 
With foreign foes mustered for instant war. 
This was their undisguised intent, and they 
Were waiting with the whole of their desires 
The moment to depart. 
An Englishman, 
Born in a land whose very name appeared 
To license some unruliness of mind ; 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

A stranger, with youth's further privilege, 
Arid the indulgence that a half-learnt speech 
i Wins from the courteous ; I, who had been else 
; Shunned and not tolerated, freely lived 
With these defenders of the Crown, and talked, 
And heard their notions ; nor did they disdain 
| The wish to bring me over to their cause. 
But though untaught by thinking or by books 
To reason well of polity or law, 
: And nice distinctions, then On every tongue, 
I Of natural rights and civil; and to acts 
Of nations and their passing interests, 
(If with unworldly ends and aims compared) 
Almost indifferent, even the historian' tale 
Prizing but little otherwise than I prized 
Tales of the poets, as it made the heart 
. Beat high, and filled the fancy with fair forms, 
Old heroes and their sufferings and their deeds ; 
Yet in the regal sceptre, and the pomp 
Of orders and degrees, I nothing found 
: Then, or had ever, even in crudest youth, 
I That dazzled me, but rather what I mourned 
And ill could brook, beholding that the best 
Ruled not, and feeling that they ought to rule. 
For, born in a poor district, and which yet 
Retaineth more of ancient homeliness, 
Than any other nook of English ground, 
; It was my fortune scarcely to have seen, 
 Through the whole tenor of my school-day time, 
The face of one, who, whether boy or man, 
; Was vested with attention or respect 
' Through claims of wealth or blood ; nor was it 
least 
Of many benefits, in later years 
Derived from academic institutes 
And rules, that they held something up to view 
. Of a Republic, where all stood thus far 
 Upon equal ground ; that we were brothers all 
Jin honour, as in one community, 
Scholars and gentlemen ; where, furthermore, 
•Distinction open lay to all that came, 
'And wealth and titles were in less esteem 
Than talents, worth, and prosperous industry. 
', Add unto this, subservience from the first 
iTo presences of God's mysterious power 
'Made manifest in Nature's sovereignty, 
And fellowship with venerable books, 
ITo sanction the proud workings of the soul, 
jAnd mountain liberty. It could not be 
jBut that one tutored thus should look with awe 
Upon the faculties of man, receive 
Gladly the highest promises, and hail, 

As best, the government of equal rights 
And individual worth. And hence, Friend ! 
If at the first great outbreak I rejoiced 
Less than might well befit my youth, the cause 
In part lay here, that unto me the events 
Seemed nothing out of nature's certain course, 
A gift that was come rather late than soon. 
No wonder, then, if advocates like these, 
Inflamed by passion, blind with prej udice, 
And stung with injury, at this riper day, 
Were impotent to make my hopes put on 
The shape of theirs, my understanding bend 
In honour to their honour : zeal, which yet 
Had slumbered, now in opposition burst 
Forth like a Polar summer : every word 
They uttered was a dart, by counter-winds 
Blown back upon themselves ; their reason seemed 
Confusion-stricken by a higher power 
Than human understanding, their discourse 
Maimed, spiritless ; and, in their weakness strong, 
I triumphed. 
Meantime, day by day, the roads 
Were crowded with the bravest youth of France, 
And all the promptest of her spirits, linked 
In gallant soldiership, and posting on 
To meet the war upon her frontier bounds. 
Yet at this very moment do tears start 
Into mine eyes : I do not say I weep — 
I wept not then, — but tears have dimmed my sight, 
In memory of the farewells of that time, 
Domestic severings, female fortitude 
At dearest separation, patriot, love 
And self-devotion, and terrestrial hope, 
Encouraged with a martyr's confidence ; 
Even files of strangers merely seen but once, 
And for a moment, men from far with sound 
Of music, martial tunes, and banners spread, 
Entering the city, here and there a face, 
Or person singled out among the rest, 
Yet still a stranger and beloved as such ; 
Even by these passing spectacles my heart 
Was oftentimes uplifted, and they seemed 
Arguments sent from Heaven to prove the cause 
Good, pure, which no one could stand up against, 
Who was not lost, abandoned, selfish, proud, 
Mean, miserable, wilfully depraved, 
Hater perverse of equity and truth. 
Among that band of Officers was one, 
Already hinted at, of other mould — 
A patriot, thence rejected by the rest, 
And with an oriental loathing spurned, 
As of a different caste. A meeker man 
Than this lived never, nor a more benign, 
k k  

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Meek though enthusiastic. Injuries 
Made him more gracious, and his nature then 
Did breathe its sweetness out most sensibly, 
As aromatic flowers on Alpine turf, 
When foot hath crushed them. He through the 
events 
Of that great change wandered in perfect faith, 
As through a book, an old romance, or tale 
Of Fairy, or some dream of actions wrought 
Behind the summer clouds. By birth he ranked 
With the most noble, but unto the poor 
Among mankind he was in service bound, 
As by some tie invisible, oaths professed 
To a religious order. Man he loved 
As man ; and, to the mean and the obscure, 
And all the homely in their homely works, 
Transferred a courtesy which had no air 
Of condescension ; but did rather seem 
A passion and a gallantry, like that 
Which he, a soldier, in his idler day 
Had paid to woman : somewhat vain he was, 
Or seemed so, yet it was not vanity, 
But fondness, and a kind of radiant joy 
Diffused around him, while he was intent 
On works of love or freedom, or revolved 
Complacently the progress of a cause, 
Whereof he was a part : yet this was meek 
And placid, and took nothing from the man 
That was delightful. Oft in solitude 
With him did I discourse about the end 
Of civil government, and its wisest forms; 
Of ancient loyalty, and chartered rights, 
Custom and habit, novelty and change ; 
Of self-respect, and virtue in the few 
For patrimonial honour set apart, 
And ignorance in the labouring multitude. 
For he, to all intolerance indisposed, 
Balanced these contemplations in his mind ; 
And I, who at that time was scarcely dipped 
Into the turmoil, bore a sounder judgment 
Than later days allowed ; carried about me, 
With less alloy to its integrity, 
The experience of past ages, as, through help 
Of books and common life, it makes sure way 
To youthful minds, by objects over near 
Not pressed upon, nor dazzled or misled 
By struggling with the crowd for present ends. 
But though not deaf, nor obstinate to find 
Error without excuse upon the side 
Of them who strove against us, more delight 
We took, and let this freely be confessed, 
In painting to ourselves the miseries 
Of royal courts, and that voluptuous life 

Unfeeling, where the man who is of soul 
The meanest thrives the most ; where dignity, 
True personal dignity, abideth not ; 
A light, a cruel, and vain world cut off 
From the natural inlets of just sentiment, 
From lowly sympathy and chastening truth ; 
Where good and evil interchange their names, 
And thirst for bloody spoils abroad is paired 
With vice at home. We added dearest themes — 
Man and his noble nature, as it is 
The gift which God has placed within his power. 
His blind desires and steady faculties 
Capable of clear truth, the one to break 
Bondage, the other to build liberty 
On firm foundations, making social life, 
Through knowledge spreading and imperishable, 
As just in regulation, and as pure 
As individual in the wise and good. 
We summoned up the honourable deeds 
Of ancient Story, thought of each bright spot, 
That would be found in all recorded time, 
Of truth preserved and error passed away : 
Of single spirits that catch the flame from Heaven, 
And how the multitudes of men will feed 
And fan each other ; thought of sects, how keen 
They are to put the appropriate nature on, 
Triumphant over every obstacle 
Of custom, language, country, love, or hate, 
And what they do and suffer for their creed ; 
How far they travel, and how long endure ; 
How quickly mighty Nations have been formed, 
From least beginnings ; how, together locked 
By new opinions, scattered tribes have made 
One body, spreading wide as clouds in heaven. 
To aspirations then of our own mind 
Did we appeal ; and, finally, beheld 
A living confirmation of the whole 
Before us, in a people from the depth 
Of shameful imbecility uprisen, 
Fresh as the morning star. Elate we looked 
Upon their virtues ; saw, in rudest men, 
Self-sacrifice the firmest; generous love, 
And continence of mind, and sense of right, 
Uppermost in the midst of fiercest strife. 



Oh, sweet it is, in academic groves/ 
Or such retirement, Friend ! as we have known 
In the green dales beside our Rotha's stream, 
Greta, or Derwent, or some nameless rill, 
To ruminate, with interchange of talk, 
On rational liberty, and hope in man, 
Justice and peace. But far more sweet such toil — 
Toil, say I, for it leads to thoughts abstruse — 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

tf nature then be standing on the brink 
f some great trial, and we hear the voice 
Df one devoted, — one whom circumstance 
ath called upon to embody his deep sense 
[n action, give it outwardly a shape, 
ind that of benediction, to the world. 
rhen doubt is not, and truth is more than 
truth, — 
^. hope it is, and a desire ; a creed 
)f zeal, by an authority Divine 
Sanctioned, of danger, difficulty, or death, 
iuch conversation, under Attic shades, 
)id Dion hold with Plato ; ripened thus 
i'or a Deliverer's glorious task,- — and such 
le, on that ministry already bound, 
leld with Eudemus and Timonides, 
lurrounded by adventurers in arms, 
Vhen those two vessels with their daring freight, 
'or the Sicilian Tyrant's overthrow, 
■ailed from Zacynthus, — philosophic war, 
iied by Philosophers. With harder fate, 
'hough like ambition, such was he, Friend ! 
pf whom I speak. So Beaupuis (let the name 
tand near the worthiest of Antiquity) 
'ashioned his life ; and many a long discourse, 
; Vith like persuasion honoured, we maintained : 
le, on his part, accoutred for the worst, 
He perished fighting, in supreme command, 
Tpon the borders of the unhappy Loire, 
''or liberty, against deluded men, 
lis fellow country-men ; and yet most blessed 
a this, that he the fate of later times 
ived not to see, nor what we now behold, 
ho have as ardent hearts as he had then. 
Along that very Loire, with festal mirth 
: esounding at all hours, and innocent yet 
f civil slaughter, was our frequent walk; 
!r in wide forests of continuous shade, 
ofty and over-arched, with open space 
ieneath the trees, clear footing many a mile — 
solemn region. Oft amid those haunts, 
;rom earnest dialogues I slipped in thought, 
)nd let remembrance steal to other times, 
'hen, o'er those interwoven roots, moss-clad, 
:nd smooth as marble or a waveless sea, 
>me Hermit, from his cell forth-strayed, might 
pace 
I sylvan meditation undisturbed ; 
| on the pavement of a Gothic church 
j alks a lone Monk, when service hath expired, 
! peace and silence. But if e'er was heard, — 
jeard, though unseen, — a devious traveller, 
firing or approaching from afar 

With speed and echoes loud of trampling hoofs 
From the hard floor reverberated, then 
It was Angelica thundering through the woods 
Upon her palfrey, or that gentle maid 
Erminia, fugitive as fair as she. 
Sometimes methought I saw a pair of knights 
Joust underneath the trees, that' as in storm 
Rocked high above their heads ; anon, the diu 
Of boisterous merriment, and music's roar, 
In sudden proclamation, burst from haunt 
Of Satyrs in some viewless glade, with dance 
Rejoicing o'er a female in the midst, 
A mortal beauty, their unhappy thrall. 
The width of those huge forests, unto me 
A novel scene, did often in this way 
Master my fancy while I wandered on 
With that revered companion. And sometimes — 
When to a convent in a meadow green, 
By a brook-side, we came, a roofless pile, 
And not by reverential touch of Time 
Dismantled, but by violence abrupt — 
In spite of those heart-bracing colloquies, 
In spite of real fervour, and of that 
Less genuine and wrought up within myself — 
I could not but bewail a wrong so harsh, 
And for the Matin-bell to sound no more 
Grieved, and the twilight taper, and the cross 
High on the topmost pinnacle, a sign 
(How welcome to the weary traveller's eyes !) 
Of hospitality and peaceful rest. 
And when the partner of those varied walks 
Pointed upon occasion to the site 
Of Romorentin, home of ancient kings, 
To the imperial edifice of Blois, 
Or to that rural castle, name now slipped 
From my remembrance, where a lady lodged, 
By the first Francis wooed, and bound to him 
In chains of mutual passion, from the tower, 
As a tradition of the country tells, 
Practised to commune with her royal knight 
By cressets and love-beacons, intercourse 
'Twixt her high-seated residence and his 
Far off at Chambord on the plain beneath ; 
Even here, though less than with the peaceful 
house 
Religious, 'mid those frequent monuments 
Of Kings, their vices and their better deeds, 
Imagination, potent to inflame 
At times with virtuous wrath and noble scorn, 
Did also often mitigate the force 
Of civic prejudice, the bigotry, 
So call it, of a youthful patriot's mind ; 
And on these spots with many gleams I looked 
Of chivalrous delight. Yet not the less, 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Hatred of absolute rule, where will of one 
Is law for all, and of that barren pride 
In them who, by immunities unjust, 
Between the sovereign and the people stand, 
His helper and not theirs, laid stronger hold 
Daily upon me, mixed with pity too 
And loye ; for where hope is, there love will be 
For the abject multitude. And when we chanced 
One day to meet a hunger-bitten girl, 
Who crept along fitting her languid gait 
Unto a heifer's motion, by a cord 
Tied to her arm, and picking thus from the lane 
Its sustenance, while the girl with pallid hands 
Was busy knitting in a heartless mood 
Of solitude, and at the sight my friend 
In agitation said, " 'Tis against that 
That we are fighting," I with him believed 
That a benignant spirit was abroad 
Which might not be withstood, that poverty 
Abject as this would in a little time 
Be found no more, that we should see the earth 
Unthwarted in her wish to recompense 
The meek, the lowly, patient child of toil, 
All institutes for ever blotted out 
That legalised exclusion, empty pomp 
Abolished, sensual state and cruel power, 
Whether by edict of the one or few; 
And finally, as sum and crown of all, 
Should see the people having a strong hand 
In framing their own laws ; whence better days 
To all mankind. But, these things set apart, 
Was not this single confidence enough 
To animate the mind that ever turned 
A thought to human welfare  That henceforth 
C^tivity by mandate without law 
Should cease ; and open accusation lead 
To sentence in the hearing of the world, 
And open punishment, if not the air 
Be free to breathe in, and the heart of man 
Dread nothing. From this height I shall not 
stoop 
To humbler matter that detained us oft 
In thought or conversation, public acts, 
And public persons, and emotions wrought 
Within the breast, as ever- varying winds 
Of record or report swept over vis ; 


ven 
ied: 

But I might here, instead, repeat a tale, 
Told by my Patriot friend, of sad events, 
That prove to what low depth had struck the roots 
How widely spread the boughs, of that old tree 
Which, as a deadly mischief, and a foul 
And black dishonour, France was weary of. 
Oh, happy time of youthful lovers, (thus 
The story might begin,) oh, balmy time, 
In which a love-knot, on a lady's brow, 
Is fairer than the fairest star in Heaven ! 
So might — and with that prelude did begin 
The record ; and, in faithful verse, was given 
The doleful sequel. 
But our little bark 
On a strong river boldly hath been launchei 
And from the driving current should we turn 
To loiter wilfully within a creek, 
Howe'er attractive, Fellow voyager ! 
Would'st thou not chide? Yet deem not m; 
pains lost : 
For Vaudracour and Julia (so were named 
The ill-fated pair) in that plain tale will draw 
Tears from the hearts of others, when their own 
Shall beat no more. Thou, also, there mayst read 
At leisure, how the enamoured youth was driven, 
By public power abased, to fatal crime, 
Nature's rebellion against monstrous law ; 
•How, between heart and heart, oppression thrus 
Her mandates, severing whom true love 
joined, 
Harassing both ,• until he sank and pressed 
The couch his fate had made for him ; supine, 
Save when the stings of viperous remorse, 
Trying their strength, enforced him to start up, 
Aghast and prayerless. Into a deep wood 
He fled, to shun the haunts of human kind ; 
There dwelt, weakened in spirit more and tf.ore 
Nor could the voice of Freedom, which tlrouji 
France 
Full speedily resounded, public hope, 
Or personal memory of his own worst wroDga 
Rouse him ; but, hidden in those gloomy shades 
His days he wasted, — an imbecile mind. 

See "Vaudracour and Julia, "p. S. — Ed 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

BOOK TENTH. 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 
CONTINUED. 
It was a beautiful and silent day 
That overspread the countenance of earth, 
Then fading with unusual quietness, — 
A day as beautiful as e'er was given 
To soothe regret, though deepening what it 
soothed, 
When by the gliding Loire I paused, and cast 
Upon his rich domains, vineyard and tilth, 
• Green meadow-ground, and many-coloured woods, 
Again, and yet again, a farewell look ; 
Then from the quiet of that scene passed on, 
Bound to the fierce Metropolis. From his throne 
The King had fallen, and that invading host — 
• Presumptuous cloud, on whose black front was 
written 
The tender mercies of the dismal wind 
That bore it — on the plains of Liberty 
Had burst innocuous. Say in bolder words, 
They — wbo had come elate as eastern hunters 
Banded beneath the Great Mogul, when he 
Erewhile went forth from Agra or Lahore, 
Rajahs and Omrahs in his train, intent 
To drive their prey enclosed within a ring 
, Wide as a province, but, the signal given, 
Before the point of the life- threatening spear 
, Narrowing itself by moments — they, rash men, 
Had seen the anticipated quarry turned 
Into avengers, from wbose wrath they fled 
: In terror. Disappointment and dismay 
■Remained for all whose fancies had run wild 
With evil expectations ; confidence 
And perfect triumph for the better cause. 
The State, as if to stamp the final seal 
On her security, and to the world 
Show what she was, a high and fearless soul, 
Exulting in defiance, or heart-stung 
 By sharp resentment, or belike to taunt 
With spiteful gratitude the baffled League, 
That had stirred up her slackening faculties 
I To a new transition, when the King was crushed, 
(Spared not the empty throne, and in proud haste 
Assumed the body and venerable name 
jOf a Republic. Lamentable crimes, 
Tis true, had gone before this hour, dire work 

Of massacre, in which the senseless sword 
Was prayed to as a judge ; but these were past, 
Earth free from them for ever, as was thought, — 
Ephemeral monsters, to be seen but once ! 
Things that could only show themselves and die. 
Cheered with this hope, to Paris I returned, 
And ranged, with ardour heretofore unfelt, 
The spacious city, and in progress passed 
The prison where the unhappy Monarch lay, 
Associate with his children and his wife 
In bondage ; and the palace, lately stormed 
With roar of cannon by a furious host. 
I crossed the square (an empty area then !) 
Of the Carrousel, where so late had lain 
The dead, upon the dying heaped, and gazed 
On this and other spots, as doth a man 
Upon a volume whose contents he knows 
Are memorable, but from him locked up, 
Being written in a tongue he cannot read, 
So that he questions the mute leaves with pain, 
And half upbraids their silence. But that night 
I felt most deeply in what world I was, 
What ground I trod on, and what air I breathed. 
High was my room and lonely, near the roof 
Of a large mansion or hotel, a lodge 
That would have pleased me in more quiet times ; 
Nor was it wholly without pleasure then. 
With unextinguished taper I kept watch, 
Reading at intervals ; the fear gone by 
Pressed on me almost like a fear to come. 
I thought of those September massacres, 
Divided from me by one little month, 
Saw them and touched : the rest was conjured up 
From tragic fictions or true history, 
Remembrances and dim admonishments. 
The horse is taught his manage, and no star 
Of wildest course but treads back his own steps ; 
For the spent hurricane the air provides 
As fierce a successor ; the tide retreats 
But to return out of its hiding-place 
In the great deep ; all things have second birth ; 
The earthquake is not satisfied at once ; 
And in this way I wrought upon myself, 
Until I seemed to hear a voice that cried, 
To the whole city, "Sleep no more." The trance 
Fled with the voice to which it had given birth ; 
But vainly comments of a calmer mind 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Promised soft peace and sweet forgetfulness. 
The place, all hushed and silent as it was, 
Appeared unfit for the repose of night, 
Defenceless as a wood where tigers roam. 
With early morning towards the Palace-walk 
Of Orleans eagerly I turned ; as yet 
The streets were still ; not so those long Arcades ; 
There, 'mid a peal of ill-matched sounds and cries, 
That greeted me on entering, I could hear 
Shrill voices from the hawkers in the throng, 
Bawling, " Denunciation of the Crimes 
Of Maximilian Robespierre ; " the hand, 
Prompt as the voice, held forth a printed speech, 
The same that had been recently pronounced, 
When Robespierre, not ignorant for what mark 
Some words of indirect reproof had been 
Intended, rose in hardihood, and dared 
The man who had an ill surmise of him 
To bring his charge in openness ; whereat, 
When a dead pause ensued, and no one stirred, 
In silence of all present, from his seat 
Louvet walked single through the avenue, 
And took his station in the Tribune, saying, 
" I, Robespierre, accuse thee ! " Well is known 
The inglorious issue of that charge, and how 
He, who had launched the startling thunderbolt, 
The one bold man, whose voice the attack had 
sounded, 
Was left without a follower to discharge 
His perilous duty, and retire lamenting 
That Heaven's best aid is wasted upon men 
Who to themselves are false. 
But these are things 
Of which I speak, only as they were storm 
Or sunshine to my individual mind, 
No further. Let me then relate that now — 
In some sort seeing with my proper eyes 
That Liberty, and Life, and Death would soon 
To the remotest corners of the land 
Lie in the arbitrement of those who ruled 
The capital City ; what was struggled for, 
And by what combatants victory must be won ; 
The indecision on their part whose aim 
Seemed best, and the straightforward path of those 
Who in attack or in defence were strong 
Through their impiety — my inmost soul 
Was agitated ; yea, I could almost 
Have prayed that throughout earth upon all men, 
By patient exercise of reason made 
Worthy of liberty, all spirits filled 
With zeal expanding in Truth's holy light, 
The gift of tongues might fall, and power arrive 
From the four quarters of the winds to do 

For France, what without help she could not do 
A work of honour ; think not that to this 
I added, work of safety : from all doubt 
Or trepidation for the end of things 
Far was I, far as angels are from guilt. 
Yet did I grieve, nor only grieved, but thought 
Of opposition and of remedies : 
An insignificant stranger and obscure, 
And one, moreover, little graced with power 
Of eloquence even in my native speech, 
And all unfit for tumult or intrigue, 
Yet would I at this time with willing heart 
Have undertaken for a cause so great 
Service however dangerous. I revolved, 
How much the destiny of Man had still 
Hung upon single persons ; that there was, 
Transcendent to all local patrimony, 
One nature, as there is one sun in heaven ; 
That objects, even as they are A great, thereby 
Do come within the reach of humblest eyes ; 
That Man is only weak through his mistrust 
And want of hope where evidence divine 
Proclaims to him that hope should be most sure; 
Nor did the inexperience of my youth 
Preclude conviction, that a spirit strong 
In hope, and trained to noble aspirations, 
A spirit thoroughly faithful to itself, 
Is for Society's unreasoning herd 
A domineering instinct, serves at once 
For way and guide, a fluent receptacle 
That gathers up each petty straggling rill 
And vein of water, glad to be rolled on 
In safe obedience ; that a mind, whose rest 
Is where it ought to be, in self-restraint, 
In circumspection and simplicity, 
Falls rarely in entire discomfiture 
Below its aim, or meets with, from without, 
A treachery that foils it or defeats ; 
And, lastly, if the means on human will, 
Frail human will, dependent should betray 
Him who too boldly trusted them, I felt 
That "mid the loud distractions of the world 
A sovereign voice subsists within the soul, 
Arbiter undisturbed of right and wrong, 
Of life and death, in majesty severe 
Enjoining, as may best promote the aims 
Of truth and justice, either sacrifice, 
From whatsoever region of our cares 
Or our infirm affections Nature pleads, 
Earnest and blind, against the stern decree. 
On the other sido, I called to mind those truths 
That are the common-places of the schools — 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

(A theme for boys, too hackneyed for their sires,) 
Yet, with a revelation's liveliness, 
In all their comprehensive bearings known 
And visible to philosophers of old, 
Men who, to business of the world untrained, 
Lived in the shade ; and to Harmodius known 
I And his compeer Aristogiton, known 
To Brutus — that tyrannic power is weak, 
Hath neither gratitude, nor faith, nor love, 
Nor the support of good or evil men 
To trust in ; that the godhead which is ours 
Can never utterly be charmed or stilled ; 
That nothing hath a natural right to last 
But equity and reason ; that all else 
. Meets foes irreconcilable, and at best 
Lives only by variety of disease. 
Well might my wishes be intense, my thoughts 
: Strong and perturbed, not doubting at that time 
But that the virtue of one paramount mind 
i Would have abashed those impious crests — have 
quelled 
I Outrage and bloody power, and — in despite 
Of what the People long had been and were 
Through ignorance and false teaching, sadder 
proof 
Of immaturity, and — in the teeth. 
: Of desperate opposition from without — 
Have cleared a passage for just government, 
'And left a solid birthright to the State, 
Redeemed, according to example given 
By ancient lawgivers. 
In this frame of mind, 
Dragged by a chain of harsh necessity, 
i So seemed it, — now I thankfully acknowledge, 
Forced by the gracious providence of Heaven, — 
To England I returned, else (though assured 
: That I both was and must be of small weight, 
[No better than a landsman on the deck 
Of a ship struggling with a hideous storm) 
Doubtless, I should have then made common cause 
With some who perished ; haply perished too, 
A poor mistaken and bewildered offering, — 
j Should to the breast of Nature have gone back, 
With all my resolutions, all my hopes, 
A Poet only to myself, to men 
'Useless, and even, beloved Friend ! a soul 
To thee unknown ! 
Twice had the trees let fall 
Their leaves, as often Winter had put on 
His hoary crown, since I had seen the surge 
Beat against Albion's shore, since ear of mine 
jHad caught the accents of my native speech 
'Upon our native country's sacred ground. 

A patriot of the world, hew could I glide 
Into communion with her sylvan shades, 
Erewhile my tuneful haunt ? It pleased me more 
To abide in the great City, where I found 
The general air still busy with the stir 
Of that first memorable onset made 
By a strong levy of humanity 
Upon the traffickers in Negro blood ; 
Effort which, though defeated, had recalled 
To notice old forgotten principles, 
And through the nation spread a novel heat 
Of virtuous feeling. For myself, I own 
That this particular strife had wanted power 
To rivet my affections ; nor did now 
Its unsuccessful issue much excite 
My sorrow ; for I brought with me the faith 
That, if France prospered, good men would not 
long 
Pay fruitless worship to humanity, 
And this most rotten branch of human shame, 
Object, so seemed it, of superfluous pains, 
Would fall together with its parent tree. 
What, then, were my emotions, when in arms 
Britain put forth her free-born strength in league, 
Oh, pity and shame ! with those confederate 
Powers ! 
Not in my single self alone I found, 
But in the minds of all ingenuous youth, 
Change and subversion from that hour. No shock 
Given to my moral nature had I known 
Down to that very moment ; neither lapse 
Nor turn of sentiment that might be named 
A revolution, save at this one time ; 
All else was progress on the self-same path 
On which, with a diversity of pace, 
I had been travelling : this a stride at once 
Into another region. As a light 
And pliant harebell, swinging in the breeze 
On some grey rock — its birth-place — so had I 
Wantoned, fast rooted on the ancient tower 
Of my beloved country, wishing not 
A happier fortune than to wither there : 
Now was I from that pleasant station torn 
And tossed about in whirlwind. I rejoiced, 
Yea, afterwards — truth most painful to record ! — 
Exulted, in the triumph of my soul, 
When Englishmen by thousands were o'erthrown, 
Left without glory on the field, or driven, 
Brave hearts ! to shameful flight. It was a grief, — 
Grief call it not, 'twas anything but that, — 
A conflict of sensations without name, 
Of which he only, who may love the sight 
Of a village steeple, as I do, can judge, 
When, in the congregation bending all 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

To their great Father, prayers were offered up, 
Or praises for our country's victories ; 
And, 'mid the simple worshippers, perchance 
I only, like an uninvited guest 
Whom no one owned, sate silent, shall I add, 
Fed on the day of vengeance yet to come. 
Oh ! much have they to account for, who could 
tear, 
By violence, at one decisive rent, 
From the best youth in England their dear pride, 
Their joy, in England ; this, too, at a time 
In which worst losses easily might wean 
The best of names, when patriotic love 
Did of itself in modesty give way, 
Like the Precursor when the Deity 
Is come Whose harbinger he was ; a time 
In which ajjostasy from ancient faith 
Seemed but conversion to a higher creed ; 
Withal a season dangerous and wild, 
A time when sage Experience would have snatched 
Flowers out of any hedge-row to compose 
A chaplet in contempt of his grey locks. 
When the proud fleet that bears the red-cross 
flag 
In that unworthy service was prepared 
To mingle, I beheld the vessels lie, 
A brood of gallant creatures, on the deep ; 
I saw them in their rest, a sojourner 
Through a whole month of calm and glassy days 
In that delightful island which protects 
Their place of convocation — there I heard, 
Each evening, pacing by the still sea-shore, 
A monitory sound that never failed, — 
The sunset cannon. While the orb went down 
In the tranquillity of nature, came 
That voice, ill requiem ! seldom heard by me 
Without a spirit overcast by dark 
Imaginations, sense of woes to come, 
Sorrow for human kind, and pain of heart. 
In France, the men, who, for their desperate 
ends, 
Had plucked up mercy by the roots, were glad 
Of this new enemy. Tyrants, strong before 
In wicked pleas, were strong as demons now ; 
And thus, on every side beset with foes, 
The goaded land waxed mad ; the crimes of few 
Spread into madness of the many ; blasts 
From hell came sanctified like airs from heaven. 
The sternness of the just, the faith of those 
Who doubted not that Providence had times 
Of vengeful retribution, theirs who throned 

The human Understanding paramount 
And made of that their God, the hopes of men 
Who were content to barter short-lived pangs 
For a paradise of ages, the blind rage 
Of insolent tempers, the light vanity 
Of intermeddlers, steady purposes 
Of the suspicious, slips of the indiscreet, 
And all the accidents of life were pressed 
Into one service, busy with one work. 
The Senate stood aghast, her prudence quenched, 
Her wisdom stifled, and her justice scared, 
Her frenzy only active to extol 
Past outrages, and shape the way for new, 
Which no one dared to oppose or mitigate. 
Domestic carnage now filled the whole year 
With feast-days; old men from the chimney -nook, 
The maiden from the bosom of her love, 
The mother from the cradle of her babe, 
The warrior from the field — all perished, all — 
Friends, enemies, of all parties, ages, ranks, 
Head after head, and never heads enough 
For those that bade them fall. They found then- 
joy, 
They made it proudly, eager as a child, 
(If like desires of innocent little ones 
May with such heinous appetites be compared), 
Pleased in some open field to exercise 
A toy that mimics with revolving wings 
The motion of a wind-mill ; though the air 
Do of itself blow fresh, and make the vanes 
Spin in his eyesight, that contents him not, 
But, with the plaything at arm's length, he sets 
His front against the blast, and runs amain, 
That it may whirl the faster. 
Amid the depth 
Of those enormities, even thinking minds 
Forgot, at seasons, whence they had their being; 
Forgot, that such a sound was ever heard 
As Liberty upon earth : yet all beneath 
Her innocent authority was wrought, 
Nor could have been, without her blessed name 
The illustrious wife of Roland, in the hour 
Of her composure, felt that agony, 
And gave it vent in her last words. Friend ! 
It was a lamentable time for man, 
Whether a hope had e'er been his or not ; 
A woful time for them whose hopes survived 
The shock ; most woful for those few who still 
Were flattered, and had trust in human kind : 
They had the deepest feeling of the grief. 
Meanwhile the Invaders fared as they deserved : 
The Herculean Commonwealth had put forth her 
arms, 

RESIDENCE IN FRANCE. 

 

And throttled with an infant godhead's might 
! The snakes ahout her cradle ; that was well, 
And as it should be ; yet no cure for them 
Whose souls were sick with pain of what would be 
Hereafter brought in charge agaiust mankind. 
Most melancholy at that time, Friend ! 
Were my day-thoughts, — my nights were miser- 
able ; 
Through months, through years, long after the 
last beat 
Of those atrocities, the hour of sleep 
To me came rarely charged with natural gifts, 
Such ghastly visions had I of despair 
And tyranny, and implements of death ; 
And innocent victims sinking under fear, 
And momentary hope, and worn-out prayer, 
Each in his separate cell, or penned in crowds 
' For sacrifice, and struggling with fond mirth 
And levity in dungeons, where the dust 
Was laid with tears. Then suddenly the scene 
Changed, and the unbroken dream entangled me 
In long orations, which I strove to plead 
Before unjust tiibunals, — with a voice 
Labouring, a brain confounded, and a sense, 
Death-like, of treacherous desertion, felt 
In the last place of refuge — my own soul. 
When I began in youth's delightful prime 
To yield myself to Nature, when that strong 
■ And holy passion overcame me first, 
Nor day nor night, evening or morn, was free 
From its oppression. But, Power Supreme ! 
' Without Whose call this world would cease to 
breathe, 
, Who from the fountain of Thy grace dost fill 
The veins that branch through every frame of life, 
Making man what he is, creature divine, 
In single or in social eminence, 
Above the rest raised infinite ascents 
When reason that enables him to be 
Is not sequestered — what a change is here ! 
How different ritual for this after-worship, 
What countenance to promote this second love ! 
The first was service paid to things which lie 
Guarded within the bosom of Thy will. 
Therefore to serve was high beatitude ; 
Tumult was therefore gladness, and the fear 
Ennobling, venerable ; sleep secure, 
And waking thoughts more rich than happiest 
dreams. 
But as the ancient Prophets, borne aloft 
In vision, yet constrained by natural laws 
With them to take a troubled human heart, 

Wanted not consolations, nor a creed 
Of reconcilement, then when they denounced, 
On towns and cities, wallowing in the abyss 
Of their offences, punishment to come ; 
Or saw, like other men, with bodily eyes, 
Before them, in some desolated place, 
The wrath consummate and the threat fulfilled ; 
So, with devout humility be it said, 
So, did a portion of that spirit fall 
On me uplifted from the vantage-ground 
Of pity and sorrow to a state of being 
That through the time's exceeding fierceness saw 
Glimpses of retribution, terrible, 
And in the order of sublime behests : 
But, even if that were not, amid the awe 
Of unintelligible chastisement, 
Not only acquiescences of faith 
Survived, but daring sympathies with power, 
Motions not treacherous or profane, else why 
Within the folds of no ungentle breast 
Their dread vibration to this hour prolonged ? 
W  ild blasts of music thus could find their way 
Into the midst of turbulent events ; 
So that worst tempests might be listened to. 
Then was the truth received into my heart, 
That, under heaviest sorrow earth can bring, 
If from the affliction somewhere do not grow 
Honour which could not else have been, a faith, 
An elevation, and a sanctity, 
If new strength be not given nor old restored, 
The blame is ours, not Nature's. When a taunt 
Was taken up by scoffers in their pride, 
Saying, " Behold the harvest that we reap 
From popxilar government and equality," 
I clearly saw that neither these nor aught 
Of wild belief engrafted on their names 
By false philosophy had caused the woe, 
But a terrific reservoir of guilt 
And ignorance filled up from age to age, 
That could no longer hold its loathsome charge, 
But burst and spread in deluge through the land. 
And as the desert hath green spots, the sea 
Small islands scattered amid stormy waves, 
So that disastrous period did not want 
Bright sprinklings of all human excellence, 
To which the silver wands of saints in Heaven 
Might point with rapturous joy. Yet not the less, 
For those examples, in no age surpassed, 
Of fortitude and energy and love, 
And human nature faithful to herself 
Under worst trials, was I driven to think 
Of the glad times when first I traversed France 
A youthful pilgrim ; above all reviewed 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

That eventide, when under windows bright 
With happy faces and with garlands hung, 
And through a rainbow-arch that spanned the 
street, 
Triumphal pomp for liberty confirmed, 
I paced, a dear companion at my side, 
The town of Arras, whence with promise high 
Issued, on delegation to sustain 
Humanity and right, that Robespierre, 
He who thereafter, and in how short time ! 
Wielded the sceptre of the Atheist crew. 
When the calamity spread far and wide — 
And this same city, that did then appear 
To outrun the rest in exultation, groaned 
Under the vengeance of her cruel son, 
As Lear reproached the winds — I could almost 
Have quarrelled with that blameless spectacle 
For lingering yet an image in my mind 
To mock me under such a strange reverse. 
Friend ! few happier moments have been mine 
Than that which told the downfall of this Tribe 
So dreaded, so abhorred. The day deserves 
A separate record. Over the smooth sands 
Of Leven's ample estuary lay 
My journey, and beneath a genial sun, 
With distant prospect among gleams of sky 
And clouds, and intermingling mountain tops, 
In one inseparable glory clad, 
Creatures of one ethereal substance met 
In consistory, like a diadem 
Or crown of burning seraphs as they sit 
In the empyrean. Underneath that pomp 
Celestial, lay unseen the pastoral vales 
Among whose happy fields I had grown up 
From childhood. On the fulgent spectacle, 
That neither passed away nor changed, I gazed 
Enrapt; but brightest things are wont to draw 
Sad opposites out of the inner heart, 
As even their pensive influence drew from mine. 
How could it otherwise ? for not in vain 
That very morning had I turned aside 
To seek the ground where, 'mid a throng of graves, 
An honoured teacher of my youth was laid, 
And on the stone were graven by his desire 
Lines from the churchyard elegy of Gray. 
This faithful guide, speaking from his death-bed, 
Added no farewell to his parting counsel, 
But said to me, " My head will soon lie low ; " 
And when I saw the turf that covered him, 
After the lapse of full eight years, those words, 
With sound of voice and countenance of the Man, 
Came back upon me, so that some few tears 
Fell from me in my own despite. But now 

I thought, still traversing that widespread plain, 
With tender pleasure of the verses graven 
Upon his tombstone, whispering to myself : 
He loved the Poets, and, if now alive, 
Would have loved me, as one not destitute 
Of promise, nor belying the kind hope 
That he had formed, when I, at his command, 
Began to spin, with toil, my earliest songs. 
As I advanced, all that I saw or felt 
Was gentleness and peace. Upon a small 
And rocky island near, a fragment stood 
(Itself like a sea rock) the low remains 
(With shells encrusted, dark with briny weeds) 
Of a dilapidated structure, once 
A. Romish chapel, where the vested priest 
Said matins at the hour that suited those 
Who crossed the sands with ebb of morning tide, 
Not far from that still ruin all the plain 
Lay spotted with a variegated crowd 
Of vehicles and travellers, horse and foot, 
Wading beneath the conduct of their guide 
In loose procession through the shallow stream 
Of inland waters ; the great sea meanwhile 
Heaved at safe distance, far retired. I paused, 
Longing for skill to paint a scene so bright 
And cheerful, but the foremost of the band 
As he approached, no salutation given 
In the familiar language of the day, 
Cried, " Robespierre is dead ! " — nor was a doubt, 
After strict question, left within my mind 
That he and his supporters all were fallen. 
Great was my transport, deep my gratitude 
To everlasting Justice, by this fiat 
Made manifest. " Come now, ye golden times," 
Said I forth-pouring on those open sands 
A hymn of triumph : " as the morning comes 
From out the bosom of the night, come ye : 
Thus far our trust is verified ; behold ! 
They who with clumsy desperation brought 
A river of Blood, and preached that nothing elso 
Could cleanse the Augean stable, by the might 
Of their own helper have been swept away ; 
Their madness stands declared and visible ; 
Elsewhere will safety now be sought, and efirth jj 
March firmly towards righteousness and peace." — ' 
Then schemes I framed more calmly, when and 
how 
The madding factions might be tranquillised, 
And how through hardships manifold and long 
The glorious renovation would proceed. 
Thus interrupted by uneasy bursts 
Of exultation, I pursued my way 

FRANCE. 

 

Along that very shore which I had skimmed 
[n former days, when — spurring from the Vale 
Of Nightshade, and St. Mary's mouldering fane, 
And the stone abbot, after circuit made 

In wantonness of heart, a joyous band 
Of school-boys hastening to their distant home 
Along the margin of the moonlight sea— 
We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. 

BOOK ELEVENTH. 

FRANCE. 

CONCLUDED. 

Prom that time forth, Authority in France 
Put on a milder face ; Terror had ceased, 
'fet everything was wanting that might give 
Courage to them who looked for good by light 
jf rational Experience, for the shoots 
And hopeful blossoms of a second spring : 
fet, in me, confidence was unimpaired ; 
Che Senate's language, and the public acts 
bid measures of the Government, though both 
Veak, and of heartless omen, had not power 
,  o daunt me ; in the People was my trust : 
Vnd, in the virtues which mine eyes had seen, 
; knew that wound external could not take 
jife from the young Republic ; that new foes 
Vould only follow, in the path of shame, 
^heir brethren, and her triumphs be in the end 
treat, universal, irresistible. 
j'his intuition led me to confound 
'>ne victory with another, higher far, — 
,'riumphs of unambitious peace at home, 
.nd noiseless fortitude. Beholding still 
Resistance strong as heretofore, I thought 
''hat what was in degree the same was likewise 
'he same in quality, — that, as the worse 
'f the two spirits then at strife remained 
r ntired, the better, surely, would preserve 
'he heart that first had roused him. Youth 
maintains, 
r i all conditions of society, 
• ommunion more direct and intimate 
fith Nature, — hence, ofttimes, with reason too — 
!han age or manhood, even. To Nature, then, 
ower had reverted : habit, custom, law, 
ad left an interregnum's open space 
ior her to move about in, uncontrolled. 
I ence could I see how Babel-like their task, 
r ho, by the recent deluge stupified, 
j r ith their whole souls went culling from the day 
i s petty promises, to build a tower 

For their own safety; laughed with my compeers 
At gravest heads, by enmity to France 
Distempered, till they found, in every blast 
Forced from the street-disturbing newsman's horn, 
For her great cause record or prophecy 
Of utter ruin. How might we believe 
That wisdom could, in any shape, come near 
Men clinging to delusions so insane  
And thus, experience proving that no few 
Of our opinions had been just, we took 
Like credit to ourselves where less was due, 
And thought that other notions were as sound, 
Yea, could not but be right, because we saw 
That foolish men opposed them. 
To a strain 
More animated I might here give way, 
And tell, since juvenile errors are my theme, 
What in those days, through Britain, was per- 
formed 
To turn all judgments out of their right course; 
But this is passion over-near ourselves, 
Reality too close and too intense, 
And intermixed with something, in my mind, 
Of scorn and condemnation personal, 
That would profane the sanctity of verse. 
Our Shepherds, this say merely, at that time 
Acted, or seemed at least to act, like men 
Thirsting to make the guardian crook of law 
A tool of murder ; they who ruled the State, 
Though with such awful proof before their eyes 
That he, who would sow death, reaps death, or 
worse, 
And can reap nothing better, child-like longed 
To imitate, not wise enough to avoid ; 
Or left (by mere timidity betrayed) 
The plain straight road, for one no better chosen 
Than if their wish had been to undermine 
Justice, and make an end of Liberty. 
But from these bitter truths I must return 
To my own history. It hath been told 
That I was led to take an eager part 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

In arguments of civil polity, 
Abruptly, and indeed before my time : 
I had approached, like other youths, the shield 
Of human nature from the golden side, 
And would have fought, even to the death, to attest 
The quality of the metal which I saw. 
What there is best in individual man, 
Of wise in passion, and sublime in power, 
Benevolent in small societies, 
And great in large ones, I had oft revolved, 
Felt deeply, but not thoroughly understood 
By reason : nay, far from it ; they were yet, 
As cause was given me afterwards to learn, 
Not proof against the injuries of the day ; 
Lodged only at the sanctuary's door, 
Not safe within its bosom. Thus prepared, 
And with such general insight into evil. 
And of the bounds which sever it from good, 
As books and common intercourse with life 
Must needs have given — to the inexperienced 
mind, 
When the world travels in a beaten road, 
Guide faithful as is needed — I began 
To meditate with ardour on the rule 
And management of nations ; what it is 
And ought to be ; and strove to learn how far 
Their power or weakness, wealth or poverty, 
Their happiness or misery, depends 
Upon their laws, and fashion of the State. 
 pleasant exercise of hope and joy ! 
For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood 
Upon our side, us who were strong in love ! 
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, 
But to be young was very Heaven ! times, 
In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways 
Of custom, law, and statute, took at once 
The attraction of a country in romance ! 
When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights 
When most intent on making of herself 
A prime enchantress — to assist the work, 
Which then was going forward in her name ! 
Not favoured spots alone, but the whole Earth, 
The beauty wore of promise — that which sets 
(As at some moments might not be unfelt 
Among the bowers of Paradise itself ) 
The budding rose above the rose full blown. 
What temper at the prospect did not wake 
To happiness unthought of? The inert 
Were roused, and lively natures rapt away ! 
They who had fed their childhood upon dreams, 
The play-fellows of fancy, who had made 

 See p. .— .EH. 

All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength 
Their ministers, — who in lordly wise had stirred 
Among the grandest objects of the sense, 
And dealt with whatsoever they found there 
As if they had within some lurking right 
To wield it ; — they, too, who of gentle mood 
Had watched all gentle motions, and to these 
Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers mor 
mild, 
And in the region of their peaceful selves ; — 
Now was it that both found, the meek and lofty 
Did both find helpers to their hearts' desire, 
And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish, — 
Were called upon to exercise their skill, 
Not in Utopia, — subterranean fields, — 
Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where ! 
But in the very world, which is the world 
Of all of us, — the place where, in the end, 
We find our happiness, or not at all ! 
Why should I not confess that Earth was the 
To me, what an inheritance, new-fallen, 
Seems, when the first time visited, to one 
Who thither comes to find in it his home ] 
He walks about and looks upon the spot 
With cordial transport, moulds it and remoulds 
And is half pleased with things that are amiss, 
'Twill be such joy to see them disappear. 
An active partisan, I thus convoked 
From every object pleasant circumstance 
To suit my ends ; I moved among mankind 
With genial feelings still predominant ; 
When erring, erring on the better part, 
And in the kinder spirit ; placable, 
Indulgent, as not uninformed that men 
See as they have been taught — Antiquity 
Gives rights to error ; and aware, no less, 
That throwing off oppression must be work 
As well of License as of Liberty ; 
And above all — for this was more than ail — 
Not caring if the wind did now and then 
Blow keen upon an eminence that gave 
Prospect so large into futurity ; 
In brief, a child of Nature, as at first, 
Diffusing only those affections wider 
That from the cradle had grown up with me, 
And losing, in no other way than light 
Is lost in light, the weak in the more strong. 
In the main outline, such it might be said 
Was my condition, till with open war 
Britain opposed the liberties of France. 
This threw me first out of the pale of love; 



FKANCE. 

 

•Soured and corrupted, upwards to the source, 
,Hy sentiments ; was not, as hitherto, 
A. swallowing up of lesser things in great, 
ut change of them into their contraries ; 
Ind thus a way was opened for mistakes 
Ind false conclusions, in degree as gross, 
In kind more dangerous. "What had been a pride, 
,Vas now a shame ; my likings and my loves 
ten in new channels, leaving old ones dry ; 
i.nd hence a blow that, in maturer age, 
Would but have touched the judgment, struck 
more deep 
nto sensations near the heart : meantime, 
Ls from the first, wild theories were afloat, 
^o whose pretensions, sedulously urged, 
had but lent a careless ear, assured 
i'hat time was ready to set all things right, 
xnd that the multitude, so long oppressed, 
Would be oppressed no more. 
But when events 
irought less encouragement, and unto these 
ihe immediate proof of principles no more 
|!ould be entrusted, while the events themselves, 
Vorn out in greatness, stripped of novelty, 
iess occupied the mind, and sentiments 
lould through my understanding's natural growth 
To longer keep their ground, by faith maintained 
If inward consciousness, and hope that laid 
| ler hand upon her object — evidence 
| afer, of universal application, such 
i .s could not be impeached, was sought elsewhere. 
But now, become oppressors in their turn, 
'renchmen had changed a war of self-defence 
or one of conquest, losing sight of all 
iTiich they had struggled for : up mounted now, 
penly in the eye of earth and heaven, 
he scale of liberty. I read her doom, 
Fith anger vexed, with disappointment sore, 
ut not dismayed, nor taking to the shame 
f a false prophet. While resentment rose 
triving to hide, what nought could heal, the 
wounds 
f mortified presumption, I adhered 
ore firmly to old tenets, and, to prove 
heir temper, strained them more ; and thus, in 
heat 
f contest, did opinions every day 
row into consequence, till round my mind 
ihey clung, as if they were its life, nay more, 
he very being of the immortal soul. 
This was the time, when, all things tending fast 
o depravation, speculative schemes — 

That promised to abstract the hopes of Man 
Out of his feelings, to be fixed thenceforth 
For ever in a purer element — 
Found ready welcome. Tempting region that 
For Zeal to enter and refresh herself, 
Where passions had the privilege to work, 
And never hear the sound of their own names. 
But, speaking more in charity, the dream 
Flattered the young, pleased with extremes, nor 
least 
With that which makes our Eeason's naked self 
The object of its fervour. What delight ! 
How glorious ! in self-knowledge and self-rule, 
To look through all the frailties of the world, 
And, with a resolute mastery shaking off 
Infirmities of nature, time, and place, 
Build social upon personal Liberty, 
Which, to the blind restraints of general laws 
Superior, magisterially adopts 
One guide, the light of circumstances, flashed 
Upon an independent intellect. 
Thus expectation rose again ; thus hope, 
From her first ground expelled, grew proud once 
more. 
Oft, as my thoughts were turned to human kind, 
I scorned indifference ; but, inflamed with thirst 
Of a secure intelligence, and sick 
Of other longing, I pursued what seemed 
A more exalted nature ; wished that Man 
Should start out of his earthy, worm-like state, 
And spread abroad the wings of Liberty, 
Lord of himself, in undisturbed delight — 
A noble aspiration ! yet I feel 
(Sustained by worthier as by wiser thoughts) 
The aspiration, nor shall ever cease 
To feel it ; — but return we to our course. 
Enough, 'tis true — could such a plea excuse 
Those aberrations — had the clamorous friends 
Of ancient Institutions said and done 
To bring disgrace upon their very names ; 
Disgrace, of which, custom and written law, 
And sundry moral sentiments as props 
Or emanations of those institutes, 
Too justly bore a part. A veil had been 
Uplifted : why deceive ourselves  in sooth, 
'Twas even so ; and sorrow for the man 
"Who either had not eyes wherewith to see, 
Or, seeing, had forgotten ! A strong shock 
Was given to old opinions ; all men's minds 
Had felt its power, and mine was both let loose, 
Let loose and goaded. After what hath been 
Already said of patriotic love, 
Suffice it here to add, that, somewhat stern 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

In temperament, withal a happy man, 
And therefore bold to look on painful things, 
Free likewise of the world, and thence more bold, 
I summoned my best skill, and toiled, intent 
To anatomise the frame of social life, 
Yea, the whole body of society 
Searched to its heart. Share with me, Friend ! the 
wish 
That some dramatic tale, endued with shapes 
Livelier, and flinging out less guarded words 
Than suit the work we fashion, might set forth 
What then I learned, or think I learned, of truth, 
And the errors into which I fell, betrayed 
By present objects, and by reasonings false 
From their beginnings, inasmuch as drawn 
Out of a heart that had been turned aside 
From Nature's way by outward accidents, 
And which was thus confounded, more and more 
Misguided, and misguiding. So I fared, 
Dragging all precepts, judgments, maxims, creeds, 
Like culprits to the bar ; calling the mind, 
Suspiciously, to establish in plain day 
Her titles and her honours ; now believing, 
Now disbelieving ; endlessly perplexed 
With impulse, motive, right and wrong, the-ground 
Of obligation, what the rule and whence 
The sanction ; till, demanding formal proof, 
And seeking it in every thing, I lost 
All feeling of conviction, and, in fine, 
Sick, wearied out with contrarieties, 
Yielded up moral questions in despair. 
This was the crisis of that strong disease, 
This the soul's last and lowest ebb ; I drooped, 
Deeming our blessed reason of least use 
Where wanted most : " The lordly attributes 
Of will and choice," I bitterly exclaimed, 
" What are they but a mockery of a Being 
Who hath in no concerns of his a test 
Of good and evil ; knows not what to fear 
Or hope for, what to covet or to shun ; 
And who, if those could be discerned, would yet 
Be little profited, would see, and ask 
Where is the obligation to enforce ? 
And, to acknowledged law rebellious, still, 
As selfish passion urged, would act amiss ; 
The dupe of folly, or the slave of crime." 
Depressed, bewildered thus, I did not walk 
With scoffers, seeking light and gay revenge 
From indiscriminate laughter, nor sate down 
In reconcilement with an utter waste 
Of intellect ; such sloth I could not brook, 
(Too well I loved, in that my spring of life, 

Pains-taking thoughts, and truth, their dear re 
ward) 
But turned to abstract science, and there sougli 
Work for the reasoning faculty enthroned 
Where the disturbances of space and time — 
Whether in matters various, properties 
Inherent, or from human will and power 
Derived — find no admission. Then it was — 
Thanks to the bounteous Giver of all good ! — 
That the beloved Sister in whose sight 
Those days were passed, now speaking in a voice 
Of sudden admonition — like a brook 
That did but cross a lonely road, and now 
Is seen, heard, felt, and caught at every turt, 
Companion never lost through many a league — 
Maintained for me a saving intercourse 
With my true self; for, though bedimmed an' 
changed 
Much, as it seemed, I was no further changed 
Than as a clouded and a waning moon : 
She whispered still that brightness would return 
She, in the midst of all, preserved me still 
A Poet, made me seek beneath that name, 
And that alone, my office upon earth ; 
And, lastly, as hereafter will be shown, 
If willing audience fail not, Nature's self, 
By all varieties of human love 
Assisted, led me back through opening day 
To those sweet counsels between head and hear 
Whence grew that genuine knowledge, fraugb 
with peace, 
Which, through the later sinkings of this cause, 
Hath still upheld me, and upholds me now 
In the catastrophe (for so they dream, 
And nothing less), when, finally to close 
And seal up all the gains of France, a Pope 
Is summoned in, to crown an Emperor — 
This last opprobrium, when we see a people, 
That once looked up in faith, as if to Heaven 
For manna, take a lesson from the dog 
Returning to his vomit; when the sun 
That rose in splendour, was alive, and moved 
In exultation with a living pomp 
Of clouds — his glory's natural retinue — 
Hath dropped all functions by the gods bestowed; 
And, turned into a gewgaw, a machine, 
Sets like an Opera phantom. 
Thus, Friend ! 
Through times of honour and through times q 
shame 
Descending, have I faithfully retraced 
The perturbations of a youthful mind 
Under a long-lived storm of great events — 
A story destined for thy ear, who now, 

FRANCE. 

 

• Among the fallen of nations, dost abide 
I Where Etna, over hill and valley, casts 
His shadow stretching towards Syracuse, 
The city of Timoleon ! Righteous Heaven ! 
' How are the mighty prostrated ! They first, 
They first of all that breathe should have awaked 
j When the great voice was heard from out the tombs 
Of ancient heroes. If I suffered grief 
! For ill-requited France, by many deemed 
; A trifler only in her proudest day ; 
! Have been distressed to think of what she once 
Promised, now is ; a far more sober cause 
Thine eyes must see of sorrow in a land, 
To the reanimating influence lost 
Of memory, to virtue lost and hope, 
Though with the wreck of loftier years bestrewn. 
But indignation works where hope is not, 
And thou, Friend ! wilt be refreshed. There is 
One great society alone on earth : 
The noble Living and the noble Dead. 
Thine be such converse strong and sanative, 
A ladder for thy spirit to reascend 
To health and joy and pure contentedness ; 
To me the grief confined, that thou art gone 
From this last spot of earth, where Freedom now 
Stands single in her only sanctuary ; 
A lonely wanderer art gone, by pain 
Compelled and sickness, at this latter day, 
This sorrowful reverse for all mankind. 
I feel for thee, must utter what I feel : 
The sympathies erewhile in part discharged, 
Gather afresh, and will have vent again : 
My own delights do scarcely seem to me 
My own delights ; the lordly Alps themselves, 
Those rosy peaks, from which the Morning looks 
Abroad on many nations, are no more 
For me that image of pure gladsomeness 
Which they were wont to be. Through kindred 
scenes, 
For purpose, at a time, how different ! 
Thou tak'st thy way, carrying the heart and soul 
That Nature gives to Poets, now by thought 
Matured, and in the summer of their strength. 
Oh ! wrap him in your shades, ye giant woods, 
On Etna's side ; and thou, flowery field 
Of Enna ! is there not some nook of thine, 
From the first play-time of the infant world 
Kept sacred to restorative delight, 
When from afar invoked by anxious love ? 

Child of the mouutains, among shepherds 
reared, 
Ere yet familiar with the classic page, 
I learnt to dream of Sicily ; and lo, 
The gloom, that, but a moment past, was deepened 
At thy command, at her command gives way ; 
A pleasant promise, wafted from her shores, 
Comes o'er my heart : in fancy I behold 
Her seas yet smiling, her once happy vales ; 
Nor can my tongue give utterance to a name 
Of note belonging to that honoured isle, 
Philosopher or Bard, Empedocles, 
Or Archimedes, pure abstracted soul ! 
That doth not yield a solace to my grief : 
And, Theocritus, so far have some 
Prevailed among the powers of heaven and earth, 
By their endowments, good or great, that they 
Have had, as thou reportest, miracles 
Wrought for them in old time : yea, not unmoved. 
When thinking on my own beloved friend, 
I hear thee tell how bees with honey fed 
Divine Comates, by his impious lord 
Within a chest imprisoned ; how they came 
Laden from blooming grove or flowery field, 
And fed him there, alive, month after month, 
Because the goatherd, blessed man ! had lips 
Wet with the Muses' nectar. 
Thus I soothe 
The pensive moments by this calm fire-side, 
And find a thousand bounteous images 
To cheer the thoughts of those I love, and mine. 
Our prayers have been accepted ; thou wilt stand 
On Etna's summit, above earth and sea, 
Triumphant, winning from the invaded heavens 
Thoughts without bound, magnificent designs, 
Worthy of poets who attuned their harps 
In wood or echoing cave, for discipline 
Of heroes ; or, in reverence to the gods, 
'Mid temples, served by sapient priests, and choii -  
Of virgins crowned with roses. Not in vain 
Those temples, where they in their ruins yet 
Survive for inspiration, shall attract 
Thy solitary steps : and on the brink 
Thou wilt recline of pastoral Arethuse ; 
Or, if that fountain be in truth no more, 
Then, near some other spring — which, by the name 
Thou gratulatest, willingly deceived — 
I see thee linger a glad votary, 
And not a captive pining for his home. 

Theoorit. Idyll, vii. .— Ed. 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

BOOK TWELFTH. 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW 
IMPAIRED AND RESTORED. 

Long time have human ignorance and guilt 
Detained us, on what spectacles of woe 
Compelled to look, and inwardly oppressed 
With sorrow, disappointment, vexing thoughts, 
Confusion of the judgment, zeal decayed, 
And, lastly, utter loss of hope itself 
And things to hope for ! Not with these began 
Our song, and not with these our song must end, — ■ 
Ye motions of delight, that haunt the sides 
Of the green hills ; ye breezes and soft airs, 
Whose subtle intercourse with breathing flowers, 
Feelingly watched, might teach Man's haughty 
race 
How without injury to take, to give 
Without offence ; ye who, as if to show 
The wondrous influence of power gently used, 
Bend the complying heads of lordly pines, 
And, with a touch, shift the stupendous clouds 
Through the whole compass of the sky ; ye brooks, 
Muttering along the stones, a busy noise 
By day, a quiet sound in silent night ; 
Ye waves, that out of the great deep steal forth 
In a calm hour to kiss the pebbly shore, 
Not mute, and then retire, fearing no storm; 
And you, ye groves, whose ministry it is 
To interpose the covert of your shades, 
Even as a sleep, between the heart of man 
And outward troubles, between man himself, 
Not seldom, and his own uneasy heart : 
Oh ! that I had a music and a voice 
Harmonious as your own, that I might tell 
What ye have done for me. The morning shines, 
Nor heedeth Man's perverseness ; Spring returns, — 
I saw the Spring return, and could rejoice, 
In common with the children of her love, 
Piping on boughs, or sporting on fresh fields, 
Or boldly seeking pleasure nearer heaven 
On wings that navigate cerulean skies. 
So neither were complacency, nor peace, 
Nor tender yearnings, wanting for my good 
Through these distracted times ; in Nature still 
Glorying, I found a counterpoise in her, 
Which, when the spirit of evil reached its height 
Maintained for me a secret happiness. 

This narrative, my Friend ! hath chiefly told 
Of intellectual power, fostering love, 
Dispensing truth, and, over men and things, 
Where reason yet might hesitate, diffusing 
Prophetic sympathies of genial faith : 
So was I favoured — such my happy lot — 
Until that natural graciousness of mind 
Gave way to overpressure from the times 
And their disastrous issues. What availed, 
When spells forbade the voyager to land, 
That fragrant notice of a pleasant shore 
Wafted, at intervals, from many a bower 
Of blissful gratitude and fearless love ? 
Dare I avow that wish was mine to see, 
And hope that future times would surely see, 
The man to come, parted, as by a gulph, 
From him who had been ; that I could no more 
Trust the elevation which had made me one 
With the great family that still survives 
To illuminate the abyss of ages past, 
Sage, warrior, patriot, hero ; for it seemed 
That their best virtues were not free from taint 
Of something false and weak, that could not stand 
The open eye of Reason. Then I said, 
" Go to the Poets, they will speak to thee 
More perfectly of purer creatures ; — yet 
If reason be nobility in man, 
Can aught be more ignoble than the man 
Whom they delight in, blinded as he is 
By prejudice, the miserable slave 
Of low ambition or distempered love  " 
In such strange passion, if I may once more 
Review the past, I warred against myself — 
A bigot to a new idolatry — 
Like a cowled monk who hathforsworn the world, 
Zealously laboured to cut off my heart 
From all the sources of her former strength ; 
And as, by simple waving of a wand, 
The wizard instantaneously dissolves 
Palace or grove, even so could I unsoul 
As readily by syllogistic words 
Those mysteries of being which have made, 
And shall continue evermore to make, 
Of the whole human race one brotherhood. 
What wonder, then, if, to a mind so far 
Perverted, even the visible Universe 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED. 

 

Fell under the dominion of a taste 
Less spiritual, with microscopic view 
Was scanned, as I had scanned the moral world  
Soul of Nature ! excellent and fair ! 
That didst rejoice with me, with whom I, too, 
Rejoiced through early youth, before the winds 
And roaring waters, and in lights and shades 
That marched and countermarched about the hills 
: In glorious apparition, Powers on whom 
I daily waited, now all eye and now 
All ear ; but never long without the heart 
Employed, and man's unfolding intellect : 
Soul of Nature ! that, by laws divine 
Sustained and governed, still dost overflow 
With an impassioned life, what feeble ones 
: Walk on this earth ! how feeble have I been 
When thou wert in thy strength ! Nor this 
through stroke 
Of human suffering, such as justifies 
 Remissness and inaptitude of mind, 
, But through presumption; even in pleasure pleased 
i Unworthily, disliking here, and there 
Liking ; by rules of mimic art transferred 
To things above all art ; but more, — for this, 
Although a strong infection of the age, 
Was never much my habit — giving way 
■ To a comparison of scene with scene, 
Bent overmuch on superficial things, 
'Pampering myself with meagre novelties 
Of colour and proportion ; to the moods 
, Of time and season, to the moral power, 
The affections and the spirit of the place, 
Insensible. Nor only did the love 
'Of sitting thus in judgment interrupt 
My deeper feelings, but another cause, 
More subtle and less easily explained, 
That almost seems inherent in the creature, 
A twofold frame of body and of mind. 
 speak in recollection of a time 
When the bodily eye, in every stage of life 
The most despotic of our senses, gained 
Such strength in me as often held my mind 
•In absolute dominion. Gladly here, 
•Entering upon abstruser argument, 
Could I endeavour to unfold the means 
Which Nature studiously employs to thwart 
Phis tyranny, summons all the senses each 
To counteract the other, and themselves, 
|A.nd makes them all, and the objects with which all 
j&re conversant, subservient in their turn 
To the great ends of Liberty and Power. 
'But leave we this : enough that my delights 
,[Such as they were) were sought insatiably. 

Vivid the transport, vivid though not profound ; 
I roamed from hill to hill, from rock to rock, 
Still craving combinations of new forms, 
New pleasure, wider empire for the sight, 
Proud of her own endowments, and rejoiced 
To lay the inner faculties asleep. 
Amid the turns and counterturns, the strife 
And various trials of our complex being, 
As we grow up, such thraldom of that sense 
Seems hard to shun. And yet I knew a maid, 
A young enthusiast, who escaped these bonds ; 
Her eye was not the mistress of her heart ; 
Far less did rules prescribed by passive taste, 
Or barren intermeddling subtleties, 
Perplex her mind ; but, wise as women are 
When genial circumstance hath favoured them, 
She welcomed what was given, and craved no more ; 
Whate'er the scene presented to her view 
That was the best, to that she was attuned 
By her benign simplicity of life, 
And through a perfect happiness of soul, 
Whose variegated feelings were in this 
Sisters, that they were each some new delight. 
Bh-ds in the bower, and lambs in the green field, 
Could they have known her, would have loved ; 
methought 
Her very presence such a sweetness breathed, 
That flowers, and trees, and even the silent hills, 
And every thing she looked on, should have had 
An intimation how she bore herself 
Towards them and to all creatures. God delights 
In such a being ; for, her common thoughts 
Are piety, her life is gratitude. 
Even like this maid, before I was called forth 
From the retirement of my native hills, 
I loved whate'er I saw : nor lightly loved, 
But most intensely ; never dreamt of aught 
More grand, more fair, more exquisitely framed 
Than those few nooks to which my happy feet 
Were limited. I had not at that time 
Lived long enough, nor in the least survived 
The first diviner influence of this world, 
As it appears to unaccustomed eyes. 
Worshipping them among the depth of things, 
As piety ordained ; could I submit 
To measured admiration, or to aught 
That should preclude humility and love  
I felt, observed, and pondered ; did not judge, 
Yea, never thought of judging; with the gift 
Of all this glory filled and satisfied. 
And afterwards, when through the gorgeous Alps 
Roaming, I carried with me the same heart : 
In truth, the degradation — howsoe'er 
LIiS 

( 

THE PEELUDE. 

Induced, effect, in whatsoe'er degree, 
Of custom that prepares a partial scale 
In which the little oft outweighs the great ; 
Or any other cause that hath been named ; 
Or lastly, aggravated by the times 
And their impassioned sounds, which well might 
make 
The milder minstrelsies of rural scenes 
Inaudible — was transient ; I had known 
Too forcibly, too early in my life, 
Visitings of imaginative power 
For this to last : I shook the habit off 
Entirely and for ever, and again 
In Nature's presence stood, as now I stand, 
A sensitive being, a creative soul. 
There are in our existence spots of time, 
That with distinct pre-eminence retain 
A renovating virtue, whence, depressed 
By false opinion and contentious thought, 
Or aught of heavier or more deadly weight, 
In trivial occupations, and the round 
Of ordinary intercourse, our minds 
Are nourished and invisibly repaired ; 
A virtue, by which pleasure is enhanced, 
That penetrates, enables us to mount, 
When high, more high, and lifts us up when fallen. 
This efficacious spirit chiefly lurks 
Among those passages of life that give 
Profoundest knowledge to what point, and how, 
The mind is lord and master — outward sense 
The obedient servant of her will. Such moments 
Are scattered everywhere, taking their date 
From our first childhood. I remember well, 
That once, while yet my inexperienced hand 
Could scarcely hold a bridle, with proud hopes 
I mounted, and we journeyed towards the hills : 
An ancient servant of my father's house 
Was with me, my encourager and guide : 
We had not travelled long, ere some mischance 
Disjoined me from my comrade; and, through fear 
Dismounting, down the rough and stony moor 
I led my horse, and, stumbling on, at length 
Came to a bottom, where in former times 
A murderer had been hung in iron chains. 
The gibbet-mast had mouldered down, the bones 
And iron case were gone ; but on the turf, 
Hard by, soon after that fell deed was wrought, 
Some unknown hand had carved the murderer's 
name. 
The monumental letters were inscribed 
In times long past ; but still, from year to year, 
By superstition of the neighbourhood, 
The grass is cleared away, and to this hour 

The characters are fresh and visible : 
A casual glance had shown them, and I fled, 
Faltering and faint, and ignorant of the road : 
Then, reascending the bare common, saw 
A naked pool that lay beneath the hills, 
The beacon on the summit, and, more near, 
A girl, who bore a pitcher on her head, 
And seemed with difficult steps to force her way 
Against the blowing wind. It was, in truth, 
An ordinary sight; but I should need 
Colours and words that are unknown to man, 
To paint the visionary dreariness 
Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide, 
Invested moorland waste, and naked pool, 
The beacon crowning the lone eminence, 
The female and her garments vexed and tossed 
By the strong wind. When, in the blessed hours 
Of early love, the loved one at my side, 
I roamed, in daily presence of this scene, 
Upon the naked pool and dreary crags, 
And on the melancholy beacon, fell 
A spirit of pleasure and youth's golden gleam ; 
And think ye not with radiance more sublime 
For these remembrances, and for the power 
They had left behind ? So feeling comes in aid 
Of feeling, and diversity of strength 
Attends us, if but once we have been strong. 
Oh ! mystery of man, from what a depth 
Proceed thy honours. I am lost, but see 
In simple childhood something of the base 
On which thy greatness stands ; but this I feel, 
That from thyself it comes, that thou must give, 
Else never canst receive. The days gone by 
Return upon me almost from the dawn 
Of life : the hiding-places of man's power 
Open ; I would approach them, but they close. 
I see by glimpses now ; when age comes on, 
May scarcely see at all ; and I would give, 
While yet we may, as far as words can give, 
Substance and life to what I feel, enshrining, 
Such is my hope, the spirit of the Past 
For future restoration. — Yet another 
Of these memorials : — 
One Christmas-time, 
On the glad eve of its dear holidays, 
Feverish, and tired, and restless, I went forth 
Into the fields, impatient for the sight 
Of those led palfreys that should bear us home ; 
My brothers and myself. There rose a crag, 
That, from the meeting-point of two highways 
Ascending, overlooked them both, far stretched ; 
Thither, uncertain on which road to fix 
My expectation, thither I repaired, 
Scout-like, and gained the summit ; 'twas a day 

IMAGINATION" AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED. 

 


Tempestuous, dark, and wild, and on the grass 
I sate half-sheltered by a naked wall ; 
Upon my right hand couched a single sheep, 
Upon my left a blasted hawthorn stood ; 
With those companions at my side, I watched, 
Straining my eyes intensely, as the mist 
Gave intermitting prospect of the copse 
And plain beneath. Ere we to school returned, — ■ 
That dreary time, — ere we had been ten days 
Sojourners in my father's house, he died, 
And I and my three brothers, orphans then, 
Followed his body to the grave. The event, 
With all the sorrow that it brought, appeared 
A chastisement; and when I called to mind 
That day so lately past, when from the crag 
I looked in such anxiety of hope ; 
With trite reflections of morality, 
Yet in the deepest passion, I bowed low 
To God, Who thus corrected my desires ; 

And, afterwards, the wind and sleety rain, 
And all the business of the elements, 
The single sheep, and the one blasted tree, 
And the bleak music from that old stone wall, 
The noise of wood and water, and the mist 
That on the line of each of those two roads 
Advanced in such indisputable shapes ■ 
All these were kindred spectacles and sounds 
To which I oft repaired, and thence would drink, 
As at a fountain ; and on winter nights, 
Down to this very time, when storm and rain 
Beat on my roof, or, haply, at noon-day, 
While in a grove I walk, whose lofty trees, 
Laden with summer's thickest foliage, rock 
In a strong wind, some working of the spirit, 
Some inward agitations thence are brought, 
Whate'er their office, whether to beguile 
Thoughts over busy in the course they took, 
Or animate an hour of vacant ease. 

BOOK THIRTEENTH. 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW 
IMPAIRED AND RESTORED. 

CONCLUDED. 

From Nature doth emotion come, and moods 
Of calmness equally are Nature's gift : 
This is her glory ; these two attributes 
Are sister horns that constitute her strength. 
Hence Genius, born to thrive by interchange 
Of peace and excitation, finds in her 
His best and purest friend ; from her receives 
That energy by which he seeks the truth, 
From her that happy stillness of the mind 
Which fits him to receive it when unsought. 
# 
Such benefit the humblest intellects 
Partake of, each in their degree ; 'tis mine 
To speak, what I myself have known and felt ; 
Smooth task ! for words find easy way, inspired 
By gratitude, and confidence in truth. 
Long time in search of knowledge did I range 
The field of human life, in heart and mind 
Benighted ; but, the dawn beginning now 
To re-appear, 'twas proved that not in vain 
I had been taught to reverence a Power 
That is the visible quality and shape 
And image of right reason ; that matures 

Her processes by steadfast laws ; gives birth 
To no impatient or fallacious hopes, 
No heat of passion or excessive zeal, 
No vain conceits ; provokes to no quick turns 
Of self-applauding intellect ; but trains 
To meekness, and exalts by humble faith; 
Holds up before the mind intoxicate 
With present objects, and the busy dance 
Of things that pass away, a temperate show 
Of objects that endure ; and by this course 
Disposes her, when over-fondly set 
On throwing off incumbrances, to seek 
In man, and in the frame of social life, 
Whate'er there is desirable and good 
Of kindred permanence, unchanged in form 
And function, or, through strict vicissitude 
Of life and death, revolving. Above all 
Were re-established now those watchful thoughts 
Which, seeing little worthy or sublime 
In what the Historian's pen so much delights 
To blazon — power and energy detached 
From moral purpose — early tutored me 
To look with feelings of fraternal love 
Upon the unassuming things that hold 
A silent station in this beauteous world. 
Thus moderated, thus composed, I found 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Once more in Man an object of delight, 
Of pure imagination, and of love; 
And, as the horizon of my mind enlarged, 
Again I took the intellectual eye 
For my instructor, studious more to see 
Great truths, than touch and handle little ones. 
Knowledge was given accordingly ; my trust 
Became more firm in feelings that had stood 
The test of such a trial ; clearer far 
My sense of excellence — of right and wrong : 
The promise of the present time retired 
Into its true proportion ; sanguine schemes, 
Ambitious projects, pleased me less ; I sought 
For present good in life's familiar face, 
And built thereon my hopes of good to come. 
With settling judgments now of what would last 
And what would disappear; prepared to find 
Presumption, folly, madness, in the men 
Who thrust themselves upon the passive world 
As Rulers of the world ; to see in these, 
Even when the public welfare is their aim, 
Plans without thought, or built on theories 
Vague and unsound; and having brought thebooks 
Of modern statists to their proper test, 
Life, human life, with all its sacred claims 
Of sex and age, and heaven-descended rights, 
Mortal, or those beyond the reach of death ; 
And having thus discerned how dire a thing 
Is worshipped in that idol proudly named 
" The Wealth of Nations," where alone that wealth 
Is lodged, and how increased ; and having gained 
A more judicious knowledge of the worth 
And dignity of individual man, 
No composition of the brain, but man 
Of whom we read, the man whom we behold 
With our own eyes — I could not but inquire — 
Not with less interest than heretofore, 
But greater, though in spirit more subdued — 
Why is this glorious creature to be found 
One only in ten thousand ? What one is, 
Why may not millions be ? What bars are thrown 
By Nature in the way of such a hope  
Our animal appetites and daily wants, 
Are these obstructions insurmountable ? 
If not, then others vanish into air. 
" Inspect the basis of the social pile : 
Inquire," said I, " how much of mental power 
And genuine virtue they possess who live 
By bodily toil, labour exceeding far 
Their due proportion, under all the weight 
Of that injustice which upon ourselves 
Ourselves entail." Such estimate to frame 
I chiefly looked (what need to look beyond ]) 

Among the natural abodes of men, 
Fields with their rural works ; recalled to mind 
My earliest notices ; with these compared 
The observations made in later youth, 
And to that day continued. — For, the time 
Had never been when throes of mighty Nations 
And the world's tumult unto me could yield, 
How far soe'er transported and possessed, 
Full measure of content; but still I craved 
An intermingling of distinct regards 
And truths of individual sympathy 
Nearer ourselves. Such often might be gleaned 
From the great City, else it must have proved 
To me a heart-depressing wilderness ; 
But much was wanting : therefore did I turn 
To you, ye pathways, and ye lonely roads ; 
Sought you enriched with everything I prized, 
With human kindnesses and simple joys. 
Oh ! next to one dear state of bliss, vouchsafed 
Alas ! to few in this untoward world, 
The bliss of walking daily in life's prime ' 
Through field or forest with the maid we love, 
While yet our hearts are young, while yet we 
breathe 
Nothing but happiness, in some lone nook, 
Deep vale, or any where, the home of both, 
From which it would be misery to stir : 
Oh ! next to such enjoyment of our youth, 
In my esteem, next to such dear delight, 
Was that of wandering on from day to day 
Where I could meditate in peace, and cull 
Knowledge that step by step might lead me on 
To wisdom ; or, as lightsome as a bird 
Wafted upon the wind from distant lands, 
Sing notes of greeting to strange fields or groves, 
Which lacked not voice to welcome me in turn : 
And, when that pleasant toil had ceased to please, 
Converse with men, where if we meet a face , 
We almost meet a friend, on naked heaths 
With long long ways before, by cottage bench, 
Or well-spring where the weary traveller rests. 
Who doth not love to follow with his eye 
The windings of a public way  the sight, 
Familiar object as it is, hath wrought 
On my imagination since the morn 
Of childhood, when a disappearing line, 
One daily present to my eyes, that crossed 
The naked summit of a far-off hill 
Beyond the limits that my feet had trod, 
Was like an invitation into space 
Boundless, or guide into eternity. 
Yes, something of the grandeur which invests 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED. 

 

The mariner who sails the roaring sea 
Through storm and darkness, early in my mind 
Surrounded, too, the wanderers of the earth ; 
Grandeur as much, and loveliness far more. 
Awed have I been by strolling Bedlamites ; 
From many other uncouth vagrants (passed 
In fear) have walked with quicker step ; but why 
Take note of this  When I began to enquire, 
To watch and question those I met, and speak 
Without reserve to them, the lonely roads 
Were open schools in which I daily read 
With most delight the passions of mankind, 
Whether by words, looks, sighs, or tears, revealed ; 
There saw into the depth of human souls, 
Souls that appear to have no depth at all 
To careless eyes. And — now convinced at heart 
How little those formalities, to which 
With overweening trust alone we give 
The name of Education, have to do 
With real feeling and just sense ; how vain 
A correspondence with the talking world 
Proves to the most; and called to make good search 
If man's estate, by doom of Nature yoked 
With toil, be therefore yoked with ignorance ; 
If virtue be indeed so hard to rear, 
And intellectual strength so rare a boon — 
I prized such walks still more, for there I found 
Hope to my hope, and to my pleasure peace 
And steadiness, and healing and repose 
To every angry passion. There I heard, 
From mouths of men obscure and lowly, truths 
Replete with honour ; sounds in unison 
With loftiest promises of good and fair. 
There are who think that strong affection, love 
Known by whatever name, is falsely deemed 
A gift, to use a term which they would use, 
Of vulgar nature ; that its growth requires 
Retirement, leisure, language purified 
By manners studied and elaborate ; 
That whoso feels such passion in its strength 
Must live within the very light and air 
Of courteous usages refined by art. 
True is it, where oppression worse than death 
Salutes the being at his birth, where grace 
Of culture hath been utterly unknown, 
And poverty and labour in excess 
From day to day pre-occupy the ground 
Of the affections, and to Nature's self 
Oppose a deeper nature ; there, indeed, 
Love cannot be ; nor does it thrive with ease 
Among the close and overcrowded haunts 
Of cities, where the human heart is sick, 
And the eye feeds it not, and cannot feed. 

— Yes, in those wanderings deeply did I feel 
How we mislead each other ; above all, 
How books mislead us, seeking their reward 
From judgments of the wealthy Few, who see 
By artificial lights ; how they debase 
The Many for the pleasure of those Few ; 
Effeminately level down the truth 
To certain general notions, for the sake 
Of being understood at once, or else 
Through want of better knowledge in the heads 
That framed them; flattering self-conceit with 
words, 
That, while they most ambitiously set forth 
Extrinsic differences, the outward marks 
Whereby society has parted man 
From man, neglect the universal heart. 
Here, calling up to mind what then I saw, 
A youthful traveller, and see daily now 
In the familiar circuit of my home, 
Here might I pause, and bend in reverence 
To Nature, and the power of human minds, 
To men as they are men within themselves. 
How oft high service is performed within, 
When all the external man is rude in show, — 
Not like a temple rich with pomp and gold, 
But a mere mountain chapel, that protects 
Its simple worshippers from sun and shower. 
Of these, said I, shall be my song ; of these, 
If future years mature me for the task, 
Will I record the praises, making verse 
Deal boldly with substantial things ; in truth 
And sanctity of passion, speak of these, 
That justice may be done, obeisance paid 
Where it is due : thus haply shall I teach, 
Inspire ; through unadulterated eai's 
Pour rapture, tenderness, and hope, — my theme 
No other than the very heart of man, 
As found among the best of those who live, 
Not tmexalted by religious faith, 
Nor uninformed by books, good books, though few, 
In Nature's presence : thence may I select 
Sorrow, that is not sorrow, but delight ; 
And miserable love, that is not pain 
To hear of, for the glory that redounds 
Therefrom to human kind, and what we are. 
Be mine to follow with no timid step 
Where knowledge leads me : it shall be my pride 
That I have dared to tread this holy ground, 
Speaking no dream, but things oracular ; 
Matter not lightly to be heard by those 
Who to the letter of the outward promise 
Do read the invisible soul ; by men adroit 
In speech, and for communion with the world 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Accomplished ; minds whose faculties are then 
Most active when they are most eloquent, 
And elevated most when most admired. 
Men may be found of other mould than these, 
"Who are their own upholders, to themselves 
Encouragement, and energy, and will, 
Expressing liveliest thoughts in lively words 
As native passion dictates. Others, too, 
There are among the walks of homely life 
Still higher, men for contemplation framed, 
Shy, and unpractised in the strife of phrase ; 
Meek men, whose very souls perhaps would sink 
Beneath them, summoned to such intercourse : 
Theirs is the language of the heavens, the power, 
The thought, the image, and the silent joy : 
Words are but under-agents in their souls ; 
"When they are grasping with their greatest 
strength, 
They do not breathe among them : this I speak 
In gratitude to God, "Who feeds our hearts 
For His own service ; knoweth, loveth us, 
When we are unregarded by the world. 
Also, about this time did I receive 
Convictions still more strong than heretofore, 
Not only that the inner frame is good, 
And graciously composed, but that, no less, 
Nature for all conditions wants not power 
To consecrate, if we have eyes to see, 
The outside of her creatures, and to breathe 
Grandeur upon the very humblest face 
Of human life. I felt that the array 
Of act and circumstance, and visible form, 
Is mainly to the pleasure of the mind 
What passion makes them ; that meanwhile the 
forms 
Of Nature have a passion in themselves, 
That intermingles with those works of man 
To which she summons him ; although the works 
Be mean, have nothing lofty of their own ; 
And that the Genius of the Poet hence 
May boldly take his way among mankind 
Wherever Nature leads ; that he hath stood 
By Nature's side among the men of old, 
And so shall stand for ever. Dearest Friend ! 
If thou partake the animating faith 
That Poets, even as Prophets, each with each 
Connected in a mighty scheme of truth, 
Have each his own peculiar faculty, 
Heaven's gift, a sense that fits him to perceive 
Objects unseen before, thou wilt not blame 
The humblest of this band who dares to hope 
That unto him hath also been vouchsafed 
An insight that in some sort he possesses, 

A privilege whereby a work of his, 
Proceeding from a source of untaught things, 
Creative and enduring, may become 
A power like one of Nature's. To a hope 
Not less ambitious once among the wilds 
Of Sarum's Plain, my youthful spirit was raised ; 
There, as I ranged at will the pastoral downs 
Trackless and smooth, or paced the bare white 
roads 
Lengthening in solitude their dreary line, 
Time with his retinue of ages fled 
Backwards, nor checked his flight until I saw 
Our dim ancestral Past in vision clear ; 
Saw multitudes of men, and, here and there, 
A single Briton clothed in wolf-skin vest, 
With shield and stone-axe, stride across the wold; 
The voice of spears was heard, the rattling spear 
Shaken by arms of mighty bone, in strength, 
Long mouldered, of barbaric majesty. 
I called on Darkness — but before the word 
Was uttered, midnight darkness seemed to take 
All objects from my sight ; and lo ! again 
The Desert visible by dismal flames ; 
It is the sacrificial altar, fed 
With living men — how deep the groans ! the voice 
Of those that crowd the giant wicker thrills 
The monumental hillocks, and the pomp 
Is for both worlds, the living and the dead. 
At other moments — (for through that wide waste 
Three summer days I roamed) where'er the Plain 
Was figured o'er with circles, lines, or mounds, 
That yet survive, a work, as some divine, 
Shaped by the Druids, so to represent 
Their knowledge of the heavens, and image forth 
The constellations — gently was I charmed 
Into a waking dream, a reverie 
That, with believing eyes, where'er I turned, 
Beheld long-bearded teachers, with white wandfl 
Uplifted, pointing to the starry sky, 
Alternately, and plain below, while breath 
Of music swayed their motions, and the waste 
Rejoiced with them and me in those sweet sounds. 
This for the past, and things that may be viewed 
Or fancied in the obscurity of years 
From monumental hints : and thou, Friend ! 
Pleased with some unpremeditated strains 
That served those wanderings to beguile, liast said 
That then and there my mind had exercised 
Upon the vulgar forms of present things, 
The actual world of our familiar days, 
Yet higher power ; had caught from them a tone, 
An image, and a character, by books 
Not hitherto reflected. Call we this 

CONCLUSION. 

 

•A partial judgment — and yet why? for then 
i We were as strangers ; and I may not speak 
Thus wrongfully of verse, however rude, 
Which on thy young imagination, trained 
In the great City, broke like light from far. 
Moreover, each man's Mind is to herself 
Witness and judge ; and I remember well 
That in life's every-day appearances 
I seemed about this time to gain clear sight 

Of a new world — a world, too, that was fit 
To be transmitted, and to other eyes 
Made visible ; as ruled by those fixed laws 
Whence spiritual dignity originates, 
Which do both give it being and maintain 
A balance, an ennobling interchange 
Of action from without and from within ; 
The excellence, pure function, and best power 
Both of the object seen, and eye that sees. 

BOOK FOURTEENTH. 

CONCLUSION. 

In one of those excursions (may they ne'er 
Fade from remembrance !) through the Northern 
tracts 
Of Cambria ranging with a youthful friend, 
I left Bethgelert's huts at couching-time, 
And westward took my way, to see the sun 
Rise, from the top of Snowdon. To the door 
Of a rude cottage at the mountain's base 
We came, and roused the shepherd who attends 
The adventurous stranger's steps, a trusty guide ; 
Then, cheered by short refreshment, sallied forth. 
It was a close, warm, breezeless summer night, 
iVan, dull, and glaring, with a dripping fog 
uow-hung and thick that covered all the sky ; 
ut, undiscouraged, we began to climb 
The mountain-side. The mist soon girt us round, 
Ind, after ordinary travellers' talk 
rVith our conductor, pensively we sank 
ach into commerce with his private thoughts : 
Thus did we breast the ascent, and by myself 
-Vas nothing either seen or heard that checked 
liose musings or diverted, save that once 
The shepherd's lurcher, who, among the crags, 
lad to his joy unearthed a hedgehog, teased 
lis coiled-up prey with barkings turbulent, 
'his small adventure, for even such it seemed 
n that wild place and at the dead of night, 
•eing over and forgotten, on we wound 
p silence as before. With forehead bent 
[Earthward, as if in opposition set 
Lgainst an enemy, I panted up 
]Vith eager pace, and no less eager thoughts. 
hus might we wear a midnight hour away, 

Ascending at loose distance each from each, 
And I, as chanced, the foremost of the band; 
When at my feet the ground appeared to brighten, 
And with a step or two seemed brighter still ; 
Nor was time given to ask or learn the cause, 
For instantly a light upon the turf 
Fell like a flash, and lo ! as I looked up, 
The Moon hung naked in a firmament 
Of azure without cloud, and at my feet 
Rested a silent sea of hoary mist. 
A hundred hills their dusky backs upheaved 
All over this still ocean ; and beyond, 
Far, far beyond, the solid vapours stretched, 
In headlands, tongues, and promontory shapes, 
Into the main Atlantic, that appeared 
To dwindle, and give up his majesty, 
Usurped upon far as the sight could reach. 
Not so the ethereal vault ; encroachment none 
Was there, nor loss ; only the inferior stars 
Had disappeared, or shed a fainter light 
In the clear presence of the full-orbed Moon, 
Who, from her sovereign elevation, gazed 
Upon the billowy ocean, as it lay 
All meek and silent, save that through a rift — 
Not distant from the shore whereon we stood, 
A fixed, abysmal, gloomy, breathing-place — 
Mounted the roar of waters, torrents, streams 
Innumerable, roaring with one voice ! 
Heard over earth and sea, and, in that hour, 
For so it seemed, felt by the starry heavens. 
When into air had partially dissolved 
That vision, given to spirits of the night 
And three chance human wanderers, in calm 
thought 
Reflected, it appeared to me the type 
Of a majestic intellect, its acts 

THE PRELUDE. 

And its possessions, what it has and craves, 
What in itself it is, and would become. 
There I beheld the emblem of a mind 
That feeds upon infinity, that broods 
Over the dark abyss, intent to hear 
Its voices issuing forth to silent light 
In one continuous stream ; a mind sustained 
By recognitions of transcendent power, 
In sense conducting to ideal form, 
In soul of more than mortal privilege. 
One function, above all, of such a mind 
Had Nature shadowed there, by putting forth, 
'Mid circumstances awful and sublime, 
That mutual domination which she loves 
To exert upon the face of outward things, 
So moulded, joined, abstracted, so endowed 
With interchangeable supremacy, 
That men, least sensitive, see, hear, perceive, 
And cannot choose but feel. The power, which all 
Acknowledge when thus moved, which Nature thus 
To bodily sense exhibits, is the express 
Eesemblance of that glorious faculty 
That higher minds bear with them as their own. 
This is the very spirit in which they deal 
With the whole compass of the universe : 
They from their native selves can send abroad 
Kindred mutations ; for themselves create 
A like existence ; and, whene'er it dawns 
Created for them, catch it, or are caught 
By its inevitable mastery, 
Like angels stopped upon the wing by sound 
Of harmony from Heaven's remotest spheres. 
Them the enduring and the transient both 
Serve to exalt ; they build up greatest things 
From least suggestions ; ever on the watch, 
Willing to work and to be wrought upon, 
They need not extraordinary calls 
To rouse them ; in a world of life they live, 
By sensible impressions not enthralled, 
But by their quickening impulse made more 
prompt 
To hold fit converse with the spiritual world, 
And with the generations of mankind 
Spread over time, past, present, and to come, 
Age after age, till Time shall be no more. 
Such minds are truly from the Deity, 
For they are Powers ; and hence the highest bliss 
That flesh can know is theirs — the consciousness 
Of Whom they are, habitually infused 
Through every image and through every thought, 
And all affections by communion raised 
From earth to heaven, from human to divine ; 
Hence endless occupation for the Soul, 
Whether discursive or intuitive; 

Hence cheerfulness for acts of daily life, 
Emotions which best foresight need not fear, 
Most worthy then of trust when most intense. 
Hence, amid ills that vex and wrongs that crush 
Our hearts — if here the words of Holy Writ 
May with fit reverence be applied — that peace 
Which passeth understanding, that repose 
In moral judgments which from this pure source 
Must come, or will by man be sought in vain. 
Oh ! who is he that hath his whole life loug 
Preserved, enlarged, this freedom in himself? 
For this alone is genuine liberty : 
Where is the favoured being who hath held 
That course unchecked, unerring, and untired, 
In one perpetual progress smooth and bright ?— 
A humbler destiny have we retraced, 
And told of lapse and hesitating choice, 
And backward wanderings along thorny ways : 
Yet — compassed round by mountain solitudes, 
Within whose solemn temple I received 
My earliest visitations, careless then 
Of what was given me ; and which now I range, 
A meditative, oft a suffering man — 
Do I declare — in accents which, from truth 
Deriving cheerful confidence, shall blend 
Their modulation with these vocal streams — 
That, whatsoever falls my better mind, 
Revolving with the accidents of life, 
May have sustained, that, howsoe'er misled, 
Never did I, in quest of right and wrong, 
Tamper with conscience from a private aim ; 
Nor was in any public hope the dupe 
Of selfish passions ; nor did ever yield 
Wilfully to mean cares or low pursuits, 
But shrunk with apprehensive jealousy 
From every combination which might aid 
The tendency, too potent in itself, 
Of use and custom to bow down the soul 
Under a growing weight of vulgar sense, 
And substitute a universe of death 
Forthat which moves with lightand life informed, 
Actual, divine, and true. To fear and love, 
To love as prime and chief, for there fear ends, 
Be this ascribed ; to early intercourse, 
In presence of sublime or beautiful forms, 
With the adverse principles of pain and joy — 
Evil as one is rashly named by men 
Who know not what they speak. By love subsists 
Ail lasting grandeur, by pervading love ; 
That gone, we are as dust. — Behold the fields 
In balmy spring-time full of rising flowers 
And joyous creatures ; see that pair, the lamb 
And the lamb's mother, and their tender ways 

CONCLUSION. 

 

hall touch thee to the heart ; thou callest this 
love, 
\ji& not inaptly so, for love it is, 
far as it carries thee. In some green bower 
lest, and be not alone, but have thou there 
'he One who is thy choice of all the world : 
'here linger, listening, gazing, with delight 
upassioned, but delight how pitiable ! 
"nless this love by a still higher love 
|e hallowed, love that breathes not without awe ; 
ove that adores, but on the knees of prayer, 
y heaven inspired ; that frees from chains the soul, 
if ted, in union with the purest, best, 
f earth-born passions, on the wings of praise 
; earing a tribute to the Almighty's Throne. 
i This spiritual Love acts not nor can exist 
'ithout Imagination, which, in truth, 
, but another name for absolute power 
:nd clearest insight, amplitude of mind, 
,nd Keason in her most exalted mood. 
his faculty hath been the feeding source 
f our long labour : we have traced the stream 
roin the blind cavern whence is faintly heard 
s natal murmur ; followed it to light 
nd open day ; accompanied its course 
Imong the ways of Nature, for a time 
(Dst sight of it bewildered and engulphed ; 
ihen given it greeting as it rose once more 
it strength, reflecting from its placid breast 
'tie works of man and face of human life ; 
ad lastly, from its progress have we drawn 
kith in life endless, the sustaining thought 
f human Being, Eternity, and God. 

Imagination having been our theme, 
I also hath that intellectual Love, 
:)r they are each in each, and cannot stand 
! vidually. — Here must thou be, Man ! 
iwer to thyself; no Helper hast thou here; 
re keepest thou in singleness thy state : 
p other can divide with thee this work : 
p secondary hand can intervene 
;> fashion this ability ; 'tis thine, 
,ie prime and vital principle is thine 
the recesses of thy nature, far 
jom any reach of outward fellowship, 
'se is not thine at all. But joy to him, 
■ l ) j°y to him who here hath sown, hath laid 
ire, the foundation of his future years ! 
r all that friendship, all that love can do, 
 that a darling countenance can look 
dear voice utter, to complete the man, 
rfect him, made imperfect in himself, 



All shall be his : and he whose soul hath risen 
Up to the height of feeling intellect 
Shall want no humbler tenderness ; his heart 
Be tender as a nursing mother's heart; 
Of female softness shall his life be full, 
Of. humble cares and delicate desires, 
Mild interests and gentlest sympathies. 
Child of my parents ! Sister of my soul ! 
Thanks in sincerest verse have been elsewhere 
Poured out for all the early tenderness 
Which I from thee imbibed : and 'tis most true 
That later seasons owed to thee no less ; 
For, spite of thy sweet influence and the touch 
Of kindred hands that opened out the springs 
Of genial thought in childhood, and in spite 
Of all that unassisted I had marked 
In life or nature of those charms minute 
That win their way into the heart by stealth 
(Still to the very going-out of youth) 
I too exclusively esteemed that love, 
And sought that beauty, which, as Milton sings, 
Hath terror in it. Thou didst soften down 
This over-sternness ; but for thee, dear Friend ! 
My soul, too reckless of mild grace, had stood 
In her original self too confident, 
Retained too long a countenance severe ; 
A rock- with torrents roaring, with the clouds 
Familiar, and a favourite of the stars : 
But thou didst plant its crevices with flowers, 
Hang it with shrubs that twinkle in the breeze, 
And teach the little birds to build their nests 
And warble in its chambers. At a time 
When Nature, destined to remain so long 
Foremost in my affections, had fallen back 
Into a second place, pleased to become 
A handmaid to a nobler than herself, 
When every day brought with it some new sense 
Of exquisite regard for common things, 
And all the earth was budding with these gifts 
Of more refined humanity, thy breath, 
Dear Sister ! was a kind of gentler spring 
That went before my steps. Thereafter came 
One whom with thee friendship had early paired ; 
She came, no more a phantom to adorn 
A moment, but an inmate of the heart, 
And yet a spirit, there for me enshrined 
To penetrate the lofty and the low; 
Even as one essence of pervading light 
Shines, in the brightest of ten thousand stars, 
And, the meek worm that feeds her lonely lamp 
Couched in the dewy grass. 
With such a theme, 
Coleridge ! with this my argument, of thee 

 

THE PRELUDE. 

Shall I be silent '? capacious Soul ! 
Placed on this earth to love and understand, 
And from thy presence shed the light of love, 
Shall I be mute, ere thou be spoken of? 
Thy kindred influence to my heart of hearts 
Did also find its way. Thus fear relaxed 
Her over-weening grasp; thus thoughts and things 
In the self-haunting spirit learned to take 
More rational proportions ; mystery, 
The incumbent mystery of sense and soul. 
Of life and death, time and eternity, 
Admitted more habitually a mild 
Interposition — a serene delight 
In closelier gathering cares, such as become 
A human creature, howsoe'er endowed, 
Poet, or destined for a humbler name ; 
And so the deep enthusiastic joy, 
The rapture of the hallelujah sent 
From all that breathes and is, was chastened, 
stemmed 
And balanced by pathetic truth, by trust 
In hopeful reason, leaning on the stay 
Of Providence ; and in reverence for duty, 
Here, if need be, struggling with storms, and there 
Strewing in peace life's humblest ground with 
herbs, 
At every season green, sweet at all hours. 
And now, Friend ! this history is brought 
To its appointed close : the discipline 
And consummation of a Poet's mind, 
In everything that stood most prominent, 
Have faithfully been pictured ; we have reached 
The time (our guiding object from the first) 
When we may, not presumptuously, I hope, 
Suppose my powers so far confirmed, and such 
My knowledge, as to make me capable 
Of building up a Work that shall endure. 
Yet much hath been omitted, as need was ; 
Of books how much ! and even of the other wealth 
That is collected among woods and fields, 
Far more : for Nature's secondary grace 
Hath hitherto been barely touched upon, 
The charm more superficial that attends 
Her works, as they present to Fancy's choice 
Apt illustrations of the moral world, 
Caught at a glance, or traced with curious pains. 
Finally, and above all, Friend ! (I speak 
With due regret) how much is overlooked 
In human nature and her subtle ways, 
As studied first in our own hearts, and then 
In life among the passions of mankind, 
Varying their composition and their hue, 

Where'er we move, under the diverse shapes 
That individual character presents 
To an attentive eye. For progress meet, 
Along this intricate and difficult path, 
Whate'er was wanting, something had I gained 
As one of many schoolfellows compelled, 
In hardy independence, to stand up 
Amid conflicting interests, and the shock 
Of various tempers ; to endure and note 
What was not understood, though known to be 
Among the mysteries of love and hate, 
Honour and shame, looking to right and left, 
Unchecked by innocence too delicate, 
And moral notions too intolerant, 
Sympathies too contracted. Hence, when callei 
To take a station among men, the step 
Was easier, the transition more secure, 
More profitable also; for, the mind 
Learns from such timely exercise to keep 
In wholesome separation the two natures, 
The one that feels, the other that observes. 
Yet one word more of personal concern ; — 
Since I withdrew unwillingly from France, 
I led an undomestic wanderer's life, 
In London chiefly harboured, whence I roamed, 
Tarrying at will in many a pleasant spot 
Of rural England's cultivated vales 
Or Cambrian solitudes. A youth — (he bore 
The name of Calvert — it shall live, if words 
Of mine can give it life,) in firm belief 
That by endowments not from me withheld 
Good might be furthered — in his last decay 
By a bequest sufficient for my needs 
Enabled me to pause for choice, and walk 
At large and unrestrained, nor damped too sooi 
By mortal cares. Himself no Poet, yet 
Far less a common follower of the world, 
He deemed that my pursuits and labours lay 
Apart from all that leads to wealth, or even 
A necessary maintenance insures, 
Without some hazard to the finer sense ; 
He cleared a passage for me, and the stream 
Flowed in the bent of Nature. 
Having now 
Told what best merits mention, further pains 
Our present purpose seems not to require, 
And I have other tasks. Recall to mind 
The mood in which this labour was begun, 
Friend ! The termination of my course 
Is nearer now, much nearer ; yet even then, 
In that distraction and intense desire, 
 said unto the life which I had lived, 
Where art thou  Hear I not a voice from thee 

CONCLUSION. 

 

'Tiich 'tis reproach to hear ? Anon I rose 
s if on wings, and saw beneath me stretched 
ast prospect of the world which I had been 
nd was ; and hence this Song, which like a lark 
have protracted, in the unwearied heavens 
nging, and often with more plaintive voice 
earth attempered and her deep-drawn sighs, 
et centring all in love, and in the end 
 gratulant, if rightly understood. 
j Whether to me shall be allotted life, 
nd, with life, power to accomplish aught of worth, 
hat will be deemed no insufficient plea 
pr having given the story of myself, 
all uncertain : but, beloved Friend ! 
ten, looking back, thou seest, in clearer view 
han any liveliest sight of yesterday, 
•bat summer, under whose indulgent skies, 
pon smooth Quantock's airy ridge we roved 
nchecked, or loitered 'mid her sylvan combs, 
iou in bewitching words, with happy heart, 
idst chaunt the vision of that Ancient Man, 
lie bright-eyed Mariner, and rueful woes 
idst utter of the Lady Christabel ; 
;ad I, associate with such labour, steeped 
soft forgetfulness the livelong hours, 
iurmuring of him who, joyous hap, was found, 
'ffcer the perils of his moonlight ride, 
'sar the loud waterfall ; or her who sate 
 misery near the miserable Thorn ; 
hen thou dost to that summer turn thy 
thoughts, 
id hast before thee all which then we were, 
> thee, in memory of that happiness, 
' will be known, by thee at least, my Friend ! 
lit, that the history of a Poet's mind 
labour not unworthy of regard : 
> thee the work shall justify itself. 
The last and later portions of this gift 

Have been prepared, not with the buoyant spirits 
That were our daily portion when we first 
Together wantoned in wild Poesy, 
But, under pressure of a private grief, 
Keen and enduring, which the mind and heart, 
That in this meditative history 
Have been laid open, needs must make me feel 
More deeply, yet enable me to bear 
More firmly ; and a comfort now hath risen 
From hope that thou art near, and wilt be soon 
Restored to us in renovated health ; 
When, after the first mingling of our tears, 
'Mong other consolations, we may draw 
Some pleasure from this offering of my love. 
Oh ! yet a few short years of useful life, 
And all will be complete, thy race be run, 
Thy monument of glory will be raised ; 
Then, though (too weak to tread the ways of truth) 
This age fall back to old idolatry, 
Though men return to servitude as fast 
As the tide ebbs, to ignominy and shame 
By nations sink together, we shall still 
Find solace — knowing what we have learnt to know, 
Rich in true happiness if allowed to be 
Faithful alike in forwarding a day 
Of firmer trust, joint labourers in the work 
(Should Providence such grace to us vouchsafe) 
Of their deliverance, surely yet to come. 
Prophets of Nature, we to them will speak 
A lasting inspiration, sanctified 
By reason, blest by faith : what we have loved, 
Others will love, and we will teach them how; 
Instruct them how the mind of man becomes 
A thousand times more beautiful than the earth 
On which he dwells, above this frame of things 
(Which, 'mid all revolution in the hopes 
And fears of men, doth still remain unchanged) 
In beauty exalted, as it is itself 
Of quality and fabric more divine. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

THE EXCURSION. 

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM, EARL OF LONSDALE, K.G. 

Oft, through thy fair domains, illustrious Peer ! 
In youth I roamed, on youthful pleasures hent ; 
And mused in rocky cell or sylvan tent, 
Beside swift-flowing Lowther's current clear. 
— Now, hy thy care befriended, I appear 
Before thee, Lonsdale, and this Work present, 
A token (may it prove a monument !) 
Rydal Mount, Westmoreland, 
July , . 

Of high respect and gratitude sincere. 
Gladly would I have waited till my task 
Had reached its close ; but Life is insecure, 
And Hope full oft fallacious a,s a dream : 
Therefore, for what is here produced, I ask 
Thy favour; trusting that tbou wilt not deem 
The offering, though imperfect, premature. 
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, 

PREFACE TO THE EDITION OF . 

The Title-page announces that this is only a 
portion of a poem ; and the Reader must be here 
apprised that it belongs to the second part of a long 
and laborious Work, which is to consist of three 
parts. — The Author will candidly acknowledge that, 
if the first of these had been completed, and in such 
a manner as to satisfy his own mind, he should 
have preferred the natural order of publication, 
and have given that to the world first ; but, as the 
second division of the Work was designed to refer 
more to passing events, and to an existing state of 
things, than the others were meant to do, more 
continuous exertion was naturally bestowed upon 
it, and greater progress made here than in the rest 
of the poem ; and as this part does not depend upon 
the preceding, to a degree which will materially 
injure its own peculiar interest, the Author, 
complying with the earnest entreaties of some 
valued Friends, presents the following pages to 
the Public. 
It may be proper to state whence the poem, of 
which The Excursion is a part, derives its Title of 
The Recluse. — Several years ago, when the 

Author retired to his native mountains, with th 
hope of being enabled to construct a literary Wor 
that might live, it was a reasonable thing that h 
should take a. review of his own mind, and examin 
how far Nature and Education had qualified hir. 
for such employment. As subsidiary tc thi 
preparation, he undertook to record, in verse, th 
origin and progress of his own powers, as far as h 
was acquainted with them. That Work, addresse 
to a dear Friend, most distinguished for his know 
ledge and genius, and to whom the Author" 
Intellect is deeply indebted, has been long finished 
and the result of the investigation which gave ris- 
to it was a determination to compose a philosophies 
poem, containing views of Man, Nature, and Society] 
and to be entitled, the Recluse ; as having for it 
principal subject the sensations and opinions of 
poet living in retirement. — The preparatory poei 
is biographical, and conducts the history of th 
Author's mind to the point when he was emboldenei 
to hope that his faculties were sufficiently matures 
for entering upon the arduous labour which he h: 
proposed to himself ; and the two Works have tkt 

THE EXCURSION. 

 

ime kind of relation to each other, if he may so 
jxpress himself, as the ante-chapel has to the body 
f a gothic church. Continuing this allusion, he 
|ay be permitted to add, that his minor Pieces, 
ihich have been long before the Public, when they 
lall be properly arranged, will be found by the 
:;tentive Reader to have such connection with the 
ain Work as may give them claim to be likened 
I the little cells, oratories, and sepulchral recesses, 
.•dinarily included in those edifices. 
The Author would not have deemed himself 
stifled in saying, upon this occasion, so much of 
iirformances either unfinished, or unpublished, if 
I had not thought that the labour bestowed by him 
toon what he has heretofore and now laid before 
e" Public, entitled him to candid attention for 
eh a statement as he thinks necessary to throw 
!;ht upon his endeavours to please and, he would 
ipe, to benefit his countrymen. — Nothing further 
■ei be added, than that the first and third parts 
■ The Recluse will consist chiefly of meditations 
I the Author's own person ; and that in the inter- 
piate part (The Excursion) the intervention of 
,aracters speaking is employed, and something of 
dramatic form adopted. 
lit is not the Author's intention formally to 
inounce a system : it was more animating to him 
proceed in a different course ; and if he shall 
cceed in conveying to the mind clear thoughts, 
' ely images, and strong feelings, the Reader will 
ve no difficulty in extracting the system for him- 
|f. And in the mean time the following passage, 
cen from the conclusion of the first book of The 
Scluse, may be acceptable as a kind of Prospectus 
'the design and scope of the whole Poem. 
JOn Man, on Nature, and on Human Life, 
ising in solitude, I oft perceive 
lir trains of imagery before me rise, 
companied by feelings of delight 
Ire, or with no unpleasing sadness mixed ; 
fid I am conscious of affecting thoughts 
ild dear remembrances, whose presence soothes 
elevates the Mind, intent to weigh 
J good and evil of our mortal state. 
,'o these emotions, whencesoe'er they come, 
Jiether from breath of outward circumstance, 
 from the Soul— an impulse to herself— 
.jould give utterance in numerous verse. 
• fruth, of Grandeur, Beauty, Love, and Hope, 
 melancholy Fear subdued by Faith; 
'blessed consolations in distress ; 
< noral strength, and intellectual Power ; 
< oy in widest commonalty spread ; 
(Jhe individual Mind that keeps her own 
I iolate retirement, subject there 
Jponscience only, and the law supreme 
('hat Intelligence which governs all — 
 ig :— ' fit audience let me find though few !' 

So prayed, more gaining than he asked, the Bard- 
In holiest mood. Urania, I shall need 
Thy guidance, or a greater Muse, if such 
Descend to earth or dwell in highest heaven ! 
For I must tread on shadowy ground, must sink 
Deep — and, aloft ascending, breathe in worlds 
To which the heaven of heavens is but a veil. 
All strength — all terror, single or in bands, 
That ever was put forth in personal form- 
Jehovah — with his thunder, and the choir 
Of shouting Angels, and the empyreal thrones— 
I pass them unalarmed. Not Cnaos, not 
The darkest pit of lowest Erebus, 
Nor aught of blinder vacancy, scooped out 
By help of dreams— can breed such fear and awe 
As fall upon us often when we look 
Into our Minds, into the Mind of Man — 
My haunt, and the main region of my song. 
— Beauty — a living Presence of the earth, 
Surpassing the most fair ideal Forms 
Which craft of delicate Spirits hath composed 
From earth's materials — waits upon my steps ; 
Pitches her tents before me as I move, 
An hourly neighbour. Paradise, and groves 
Elysian, Fortunate Fields— like those of old 
Sought in the Atlantic Main — why should they be 
A history only of departed things, 
Or a mere fiction of what never was ? 
For the discerning intellect of Man, 
When wedded to this goodly universe 
In love and holy passion, shall find these 
A simple produce of the common day. 
— I, long before the blissful hour arrives, 
Would chant, in lonely peace, the spousal verse 
Of this great consummation : — and, by words 
Which speak of nothing more than what we are, 
Would I arouse the sensual from their sleep 
Of Death, and win the vacant and the vain 
To noble raptures ; while my voice proclaims 
How exquisitely the individual Mind 
(And the progressive powers perhaps no less 
Of the whole species) to the external World 
Is fitted : — and how exquisitely, too — 
Theme this but little heard of among men— 
The external World is fitted to the Mind ; 
And the creation (by no lower name 
Can it be called) which they with blended might 
Accomplish : — this is our high argument. 
— Such grateful haunts foregoing, if I oft 
Must turn elsewhere — to travel near the tribes 
And fellowships of men, and see ill sights 
Of madding passions mutually inflamed ; 
Must hear Humanity in fields and groves 
Pipe solitary anguish ; or must hang 
Brooding above the fierce confederate storm 
Of sorrow, barricadoed evermore 
Within the walls of cities — may these sounds 
Have their authentic comment ; that even these 
Hearing, I be not downcast or forlorn ! — 
Descend, prophetic Spirit .' that inspir'st 
The human Soul of universal earth, 
Dreaming on things to come ; and dost possess 
A metropolitan temple in the hearts 
Of mighty Poets : upon me bestow 
A gift of genuine insight ; that my Song 
With star-like virtue in its place may shine, 
Shedding benignant influence, and secure, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Itself, from all malevolent effect 
Of those mutations that extend their sway 
Throughout the nether sphere ! — And if with this 
I mix more lowly matter ; with the thing 
Contemplated, describe the Mind and Man 
Contemplating ; and who, and what he was — 
The transitory Being that beheld 
This Vision ; when and where, and how he lived ;- 
Be not this labour useless. If such theme 

May sort with highest objects, then— dread Power ! 
Whose gracious favour is the primal source 
Of all illumination — may my Life 
Express the image of a better time, 
More wise desires, and simpler manners ; — nurso 
My Heart in genuine freedom : — all pure thoughts 
Be with me ; — so shall thy unfailing love 
Guide, and support, and cheer me to the end ! ' 

BOOK FIRST. 

THE WANDERER. 

ARGUMENT. 
A summer forenoon. — The Author reaches a ruined Cot- 
tage upon a Common, and there meets with a revered 
Friend, the Wanderer, of whose education and course 
of life he gives an account The Wanderer, while rest- 
ing under the shade of the Trees that surround the 
Cottage, relates the History of its last Inhabitant. 
'Twas summer, and the sun had mounted high : 
Southward the landscape indistinctly glared 
Through a pale steam ; but all the northern downs, 
In clearest air ascending, showed far off 
A surface dappled o'er with shadows flung 
From brooding clouds ; shadows that lay in spots 
Determined and unmoved, with steady beams 
Of bright and pleasant sunshine interposed ; 
To him most pleasant who on soft cool moss 
Extends his careless limbs along the front 
Of some huge cave, whose rocky ceiling casts 
A twilight of its own, an ample shade, 
Where the wren warbles, while the dreaming man, 
Half conscious of the soothing melody, 
With side-long eye looks out upon the scene, 
By power of that impending covert, thrown, 
To finer distance. Mine was at that hour 
Far other lot, yet with good hope that soon 
Under a shade as grateful I should find 
Rest, and be welcomed there to livelier joy. 
Across a bare wide Common I was toiling 
With languid steps that by the slippery turf 
Were baffled ; nor could my weak arm disperse 
The host of insects gathering round my face, 
And ever with me as I paced along. 
Upon that open moorland stood a grove, 
The wished-for port to which my course was bound. 
Thither I came, and there, amid the gloom 
Spread by a brotherhood of lofty elms, 
Appeared a roofless Hut; four naked walls 
That stared upon each other ! — I looked round, 

And to my wish and to my hope espied 
The Friend I sought ; a Man of reverend age, 
But stout and hale, for travel unimpaired. 
There was he seen upon the cottage-bench, 
Recumbent in the shade, as if asleep ; 
An iron-pointed staff lay at his side. 
Him had I marked the day before — alone 
And stationed in the public way, with face 
Turned toward the sun then setting, while that sta 
Afforded, to the figure of the man 
Detained for contemplation or repose, 
Graceful support ; his countenance as he stood 
Was hidden from my view, and he remained 
Unrecognised ; but, stricken by the sight, 
With slackened footsteps I advanced, and soon 
A glad congratulation we exchanged 
At such unthought-of meeting. — For the night 
We parted, nothing willingly ; and now 
He by appointment waited for me here, 
Under the covert of these clustering elms. 
We were tried Friends : amid a pleasant vale, 
In the antique market-village where was passed 
My school-time, an apartment he had owned, 
To which at intervals the Wanderer drew, 
And found a kind of home or harbour there. 
He loved me ; from a swarm of rosy boys 
Singled out me, as he in sport would say, 
For my grave looks, too thoughtful for my years 
As I grew up, it was my best delight 
To be his chosen comrade. Many a time, 
On holidays, we rambled through the woods : 
We sate — we walked ; he pleased me with report 
Of things which he had seen ; and often touched 
Abstrusest matter, reasonings of the mind 
Turned inward ; or at my request would sing 
Old songs, the product of his native hills ; 
A skilful distribution of sweet sounds, 
Feeding the soul, and eagerly imbibed 
As cool refreshing water, by the care 

THE WANDERER. 


 

Of the industrious husbandman, diffused 
Through a parched meadow-ground, in time of 
drought. 
Still deeper welcome found his pure discourse : 
How precious when in riper days I learned 
To weigh with care his words, and to rejoice 
In the plain presence of his dignity ! 
Oh ! many are the Poets that are sown 
. By Nature ; men endowed with highest gifts, 
The vision and the faculty divine ; 
' Yet wanting the accomplishment of verse, 
(Which, in the docile season of their youth, 
It was denied them to acquire, through lack 
Of culture and the inspiring aid of books, 
Or haply by a temper too severe, 
Or a nice backwardness afraid of shame) 
Nor having e'er, as life advanced, been led 
By circumstance to take unto the height 
The measure of themselves, these favoured Beings, 
;A but a scattered few, live out their time, 
iHusbanding that which they possess within, 
And go to the grave, unthought of. Strongest minds 
Are often those of whom the noisy world 
Hears least ; else surely this Man had not left 
His graces unrevealed and unproclaimed. 
But, as the mind was filled with inward light, 
o not without distinction had he lived, 
Beloved and honoured — far as he was known, 
^nd some small portion of his eloquent speech, 
\nd something that may serve to set in view 
The feeling pleasures of his loneliness, 
lis observations, and the thoughts his mind 
rlad dealt with — I will here record in verse ; 
'iVhich, if with truth it correspond, and sink 
i)r rise as venerable Nature leads, 
"he high and tender Muses shall accept 
iVith gracious smile, deliberately pleased, 
; lnd listening Time reward with sacred praise. 

Among the hills of Athol he was born ; 
inhere, on a small hereditary farm, 
|in unproductive slip of rugged ground, 
'lis Parents, with their numerous offspring, dwelt ; 
I. virtuous household, though exceeding poor ! 
Iure livers were they all, austere and grave, 
nd fearing God ; the very children taught 
tern self-respect, a reverence for God's word, 
nd an habitual piety, maintained 
th strictness scarcely known on English ground. 
From his sixth year, the Boy of whom I speak, 
i summer, tended cattle on the hills ; 
jut, through the inclement and the perilous days 

Of long-continuing winter, he repaired, 
Equipped with satchel, to a school, that stood 
Sole building on a mountain's dreary edge, 
Remote from view of city spire, or sound 
Of minster clock ! From that bleak tenement 
He, many an evening, to his distant home 
In solitude returning, saw the hills 
Grow larger in the darkness ; all alone 
Beheld the stars come out above his head, 
And travelled through the wood, with no one near 
To whom he might confess the things he saw. 
So the foundations of his mind were laid. 
In such communion, not from terror free, 
While yet a child, and long before his time, 
Had he perceived the presence and the power 
Of greatness ; and deep feelings had impressed 
So vividly great objects that they lay 
Upon his mind like substances, whose presence 
Perplexed the bodily sense. He had received 
A precious gift ; for, as he grew in years, 
With these impressions would he still compare 
Alibis remembrances, thoughts, shapes, and forms ; 
And, being still unsatisfied with aught 
Of dimmer character, he thence attained < 
An active power to fasten images 
Upon his brain ; and on their pictured lines 
Intensely brooded, even till they acquired 
The liveliness of dreams. Nor did he fail, 
While yet a child, with a child's eagerness 
Incessantly to turn his ear and eye 
On all things which the moving seasons brought 
To feed such appetite — nor this alone 
Appeased his yearning : — in the after-day 
Of boyhood, many an hour in caves forlorn, 
And 'mid the hollow depths of naked crags 
He sate, and even in their fixed lineaments, 
Or from the power of a peculiar eye, 
Or by creative feeling overborne, 
Or by predominance of thought oppressed, 
Even in their fixed and steady lineaments 
He traced an ebbing and a flowing mind, 
Expression ever varying ! 
Thus informed, 
He had j;mall need of books ; for many a tale 
Traditionary, round the mountains hung, 
And many a legend, peopling the dark woods, 
Nourished Imagination in her growth, 
And gave the Mind that apprehensive power 
By which she is made quick to recognise 
The moral properties and scope of things. 
But eagerly he read, and read again, 
Whate'er the minister's old shelf supplied ; 
The life and death of martyrs, who sustained, 
M M 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

With will inflexible, those fearful pangs 
Triumphantly displayed in records left 
Of persecution, and the Covenant — times 
Whose echo rings through Scotland to this hour ! 
And there, by lucky hap, had been preserved 
A straggling volume, torn and incomplete, 
That left half-told the preternatural tale, 
Romance of giants, chronicle of fiends, 
Profuse in garniture of wooden cuts 
Strange and uncouth ; dire faces, figures dire, 
Sharp-kneed, sharp-elbowed, and lean-ankled too, 
With long and ghostly shanks — forms which once 
seen 
Could never be forgotten ! 
In his heart, 
Where Fear sate thus, a cherished visitant, 
Was wanting yet the pure delight of love 
By sound diffused, or by the breathing air, 
Or by the silent looks of happy things, 
Or flowing from the universal face 
Of earth and sky. But he had felt the power 
Of Nature, and already was prepared, 
By his intense conceptions, to receive 
Deeply the lesson deep of love which he, 
Whom Nature, by whatever means, has taught 
To feel intensely, cannot but receive. 
Such was the Boy — but for the growing Youth 
What soul was his, when, from the naked top 
Of some bold headland, he beheld the sun 
Rise up, and bathe the world in light ! He looked — 
Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth 
And ocean's liquid mass, in gladness lay 
Beneath him : — Far and wide the clouds were 
touched, 
And in their silent faces could he read 
Unutterable love. Sound needed none, 
Nor any voice of joy ; his spirit drank 
The spectacle : sensation, soul, and form, 
All melted into him ; they swallowed up 
His animal being ; in them did he live, 
And by them did he live ; they were his life. 
In such access of mind, in such high hour 
Of visitation from the living God, 
Thought was not ; in enjoyment it expired. 
No thanks he breathed, he proffered no request ; 
Rapt into still communion that transcends 
The imperfect offices of prayer and praise, 
His mind was a thanksgiving to the power 
That made him ; it was blessedness and love ! 
A Herdsman on the lonely mountain tops, 
Such intercourse was his, and in this sort 
Was his existence oftentimes possessed. 


then how beautiful, how bright, appeared 
The written promise ! Early had he learned 
To reverence the volume that displays 
The mystery, the life which cannot die ; 
But in the mountains did he feel his faith. 
All tilings, responsive to the writing, there 
Breathed immortality, revolving life, 
And greatness still revolving ; infinite : 
There littleness was not ; the least of things 
Seemed infinite ; and there his spirit shaped 
Her prospects, nor did he believe, — he saw. 
What wonder if his being thus became 
Sublime and comprehensive ! Low desires, 
Low thoughts had there no place; yet was Lis 
heart 
Lowly ; for he was meek in gratitude, 
Oft as he called those ecstasies to mind, 
And whence they flowed ; and from them he 
acquired 
Wisdom, which works thro' patience ; thence he 
learned 
In oft-recurring hours of sober thought 
To look on Nature with a humble heart, 
Self-questioned where it did not understand, 
And with a superstitious eye of love. 
So passed the time ; yet to the nearest town 
He duly went with what small overplus 
His earnings might supply, and brought away 
The book that most had tempted his desires 
While at the stall he read. Among the hills 
He gazed upon that mighty orb of song, 
The divine Milton. Lore of different kind, 
The annual savings of a toilsome life, 
His School-master supplied ; books that explain 
The purer elements of truth involved 
In lines and numbers, and, by charm severe, 
(Especially perceived where nature droops 
And feeling is suppressed) preserve the mind 
Busy in solitude and poverty. 
These occupations oftentimes deceived 
The listless hours, while in the hollow vale, 
Hollow and green, he lay on the green turf 
In pensive idleness. What could he do, 
Thus daily thirsting, in that lonesome life, 
With blind endeavours ? Yet, still uppermost, 
Nature was at his heart as if he felt, 
Though yet he knew not how, a wasting power 
In all things that from her sweet influence 
Might tend to wean him. Therefore with her hues, 
Her forms, and with the spirit of her forms, 
He clothed the nakedness of austere truth. 
While yet he fingered in the rudiments 
Of science, and among her simplest laws, 

THE WANDERER. 

 

His triangles — they were the stars of heaven, 
The silent stars ! Oft did he take delight 
i To measure the altitude of some tall crag 
That is the eagle's birth-place, or some peak 
! Familiar with forgotten years, that shows 
Inscribed upon its visionary sides, 
'The history of many a winter storm, 
Or obscure records of the path of fire. 
And thus before his eighteenth year was told, 
Accumulated feelings pressed his heart 
 With still increasing weight ; he was o'erpowered 
By Nature ; by the turbulence subdued 
Of his own mind ; by mystery and hope, 
And the first virgin passion of a soul 
Communing with the glorious universe. 
Full often wished he that the winds might rage 
.When they were silent : far more fondly now 
Than in his earlier season did he love 
Tempestuous nights — the conflict and the sounds 
rhat five in darkness. From his intellect 
Ind from the stillness of abstracted thought 
le asked repose ; and, failing oft to win 
Phe peace required, he scanned the laws of light 
imid the roar of torrents, where they send 
/rom hollow clefts up to the clearer air 
i cloud of mist, that smitten by the sun 
/aries its rainbow hues. But vainly thus, 
uid vainly by all other means, he strove 
i'o mitigate the fever of his heart. 
In dreams, in study, and in ardent thought, 
Tius was he reared ; much wanting to assist 
he growth of intellect, yet gaining more, 
,.nd every moral feeling of his soul 
trengthened and braced, by breathing in content 
he keen, the wholesome, air of poverty, 
nd drinking from the well of homely life. 
-But, from past liberty, and tried restraints, 
e now was summoned to select the course 
f humble industry that promised best 
 yield him no unworthy maintenance, 
rged by his Mother, he essayed to teach 
j village-school — but wandering thoughts were then 
;' misery to him ; and the Youth resigned 
task he was unable to perform. 

'That stern yet kindly Spirit, who constrains 
ie Savoyard to quit his naked rocks, 
lie free-born Swiss to leave his narrow vales, 
ipirit attached to regions mountainous 
jie their own stedfast clouds) did now impel 
restless mind to look abroad with hope. 
A.n irksome drudgery seems it to plod on, 

Through hot and dusty ways, or pelting storm, 
A vagrant Merchant under a heavy load 
Bent as he moves, and needing frequent rest ; 
Yet do such travellers find their own delight ; 
And their hard service, deemed debasing now, 
Gained merited respect in simpler times ; 
When squire, and priest, and they who round them 
dwelt 
In rustic sequestration — all dependent 
Upon the Pedlar's toil — supplied their wants, 
Or pleased their fancies, with the wares he brought. 
Not ignorant was the Youth that still no few 
Of his adventurous countrymen were led 
By perseverance in this track of life 
To competence and ease : — to him it offered 
Attractions manifold ; — and this he chose. 
— His Parents on the enterprise bestowed 
Then." farewell benediction, but with hearts 
Foreboding evil. From his native hills 
He wandered far ; much did he see of men, 
Their manners, their enjoyments, and pursuits, 
Their passions and their feelings ; chiefly those 
Essential and eternal in the heart, 
That, 'mid the simpler forms of rural life, 
Exist more simple in their elements, 
And speak a plainer language. In the woods, 
A lone Enthusiast, and among the fields, 
Itinerant in this labour, he had passed 
The better portion of his time ; and there 
Spontaneously had his affections thriven 
Amid the bounties of the year, the peace 
And liberty of nature ; there he kept 
In solitude and solitary thought 
His mind in a just equipoise of love. 
Serene it was, unclouded by the cares 
Of ordinary life ; unvexed, unwarped 
By partial bondage. In his steady course, 
No piteous revolutions had he felt, 
No wild varieties of joy and grief. 
Unoccupied by sorrow of its own, 
His heart lay open ; and, by nature tuned 
And constant disposition of his thoughts 
To sympathy with man, he was alive 
To all that was enjoyed where'er he went, 
And all that was endured ; for, in himself 
Happy, and quiet in his cheerfulness, 
He had no painful pressure from without 
That made him turn aside from wretchedness 
With coward fears. He could afford to suffer 
With those whom he saw suffer. Hence it came 
That in our best experience he was rich, 
And in the wisdom of our daily life. 
For hence, minutely, in his various rounds, 
He had observed the progress and decay 
m M  

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Of many minds, of minds and bodies too ; 
The history of many families ; 
How they had prospered ; how they were o'erthrown 
By passion or mischance, or such misrule 
Among the unthinking masters of the earth 
As makes the nations groan. 
This active course 
He followed till provision for his wants 
Had been obtained ; — the Wanderer then resolved 
To pass the remnant of his days, untasked 
With needless services, from hardship free. 
His calling laid aside, he lived at ease : 
But still he loved to pace the public roads 
And the wild paths ; and, by the summer's warmth 
Invited, often would he leave his home 
And j ourney far, revisiting the scenes 
That to his memory were most endeared. 
— Vigorous in health, of hopeful spirits, undamped 
By worldly-mindedness or anxious care ; 
Observant, studious, thoughtful, and refreshed 
By knowledge gathered up from day to day ; 
Thus had he lived a long and innocent life. 
The Scottish Church, both on himself and those 
With whom from childhood he grew up, had held 
The strong hand of her purity ; and still 
Had watched him with an unrelenting eye. 
This he remembered in his riper age 
With gratitude, and reverential thoughts. 
But by the native vigour of his mind, 
By his habitual wanderings out of doors, 
By loneliness, and goodness, and kind works, 
Whate'er, in docile childhood or in youth, 
He had imbibed of fear or darker thought 
Was melted all away ; so true was this, 
That sometimes his religion seemed to me 
Self-taught, as of a dreamer in the woods ; 
Who to the model of his own pure heart 
Shaped his belief, as grace divine inspired, 
And human reason dictated with awe. 
— And surely never did there live on earth 
A man of kindlier nature. The rough sports 
And teasing ways of children vexed not him ; 
Indulgent listener was he to the tongue 
Of garrulous age ; nor did the sick man's tale, 
To his fraternal sympathy addressed, 
Obtain reluctant hearing. 
Plain his garb ; 
Such as might suit a rustic Sire, prepared 
For sabbath duties ; yet he was a man 
Whom no one could have passed without remark. 
Active and nervous was his gait ; his limbs 
And his whole figure breathed intelligence. 
Time had compressed the freshness of his cheek 

Into a narrower circle of deep red, 
But had not tamed his eye ; that, under brows 
Shaggy and grey, had meanings which it brought 
From years of youth ; which, like a Being; made 
Of many Beings, he had wondrous skill 
To blend with knowledge of the years to come, 
Human, or such as lie beyond the grave. 

So was He framed ; and such his course of life 
Who now, with no appendage but a staff, 
The prized memorial of relinquished toils, 
Upon that cottage-bench reposed his limbs, 
Screened from the sun. Supine the Wanderer lav 
His eyes as if in drowsiness half shut, 
The shadows of the breezy elms above 
Dappling his face. He had not heard the sound 
Of my approaching steps, and in the shade 
Unnoticed did I stand some minutes' space. 
At length I hailed him, seeing that his hat 
Was moist with water-drops, as if the brim 
Had newly scooped a running stream. He rose, 
And ere our lively greeting into peace 
Had settled, '"Tis," said I, "a burning day: 
My lips are parched with thirst, but you, it seems 
Have somewhere found relief." He, at the ward, 
Pointing towards a sweet-briar, bade me climb 
The fence where that aspiring shrub looked out 
Upon the public way. It was a plot 
Of garden ground run wild, its matted weeds 
Marked with the steps of those, whom, as they passed; 
The gooseberry trees that shot in long lank slips, 
Or currants, hanging from their leafless stems, 
In scanty strings, had tempted to o'erleap 
The broken wall. I looked around, and there, 
Where two tall hedge-rows of thick alder bough 
Joined in a cold damp nook, espied a well 
Shrouded with willow-flowers and plumy fern. 
My thirst I slaked, and, from the cheerless spot 
Withdrawing, straightway to the shade returned 
Where sate the old Man on the cottage-bench ; 
And, while, beside him, with uncovered head, 
I yet was standing, freely to respire, 
And cool my temples in the fanning air, 
Thus did he speak. "I see around me here 
Things which you cannot see : we die, my Fiiciii 
Nor we alone, but that which each man loved 
And prized in his peculiar nook of earth 
Dies with him, or is changed ; and very soon 
Even of the good is no memorial left. 
— The Poets, in their elegies and songs 
Lamenting the departed, call the groves, 
They call upon the hills and streams to mourn, 
And senseless rocks ; nor idly ; for they speak, 

THE WANDERER. 

 

In these their invocations, with a voice 
: Obedient to the strong creative power 
Of human passion. Sympathies there are 
More tranquil, yet perhaps of kindred birth, 
That steal upon the meditative mind, 
And grow with thought. Beside yon spring I stood, 
And eyed its waters till we seemed to feel 
One sadness, they and I. For them a bond 
Of brotherhood is broken : time has been 
When, every day, the touch of human hand 
Dislodged the natural sleep that binds them up 
In mortal stillness ; and they ministered 
To human comfort. Stooping down to drink, 
Upon the slimy foot-stone I espied 
The useless fragment of a wooden bowl, 
Green with the moss of years, and subject only 
To the soft handling of the elements : 
•There let it lie — how foolish are such thoughts ! 
Forgive them ; — never— never did my steps 
! Approach this door but she who dwelt within 
:A daughter's welcome gave me, and I loved her 
As my own child. Oh, Sir ! the good die first, 
IjAnd they whose hearts are dry as summer dust 
Burn to the socket. Many a passenger 
! Hath blessed poor Margaret for her gentle looks, 
i.When she upheld the cool refreshment drawn 
 b'rom that forsaken spring ; and no one came 
I But he was welcome ; no one went away 
ut that it seemed she loved him. She is dead, 
lithe light extinguished of her lonely hut, 
j The hut itself abandoned to decay, 
ini she forgotten in the quiet grave. 
I speak," continued he, " of One whose stock 
,)f virtues bloomed beneath this lowly roof. 
She was a Woman of a steady mind, 
lender and deep in her excess of love ; 
: ^ot speaking much, pleased rather with the joy 
j)f her own thoughts : by some especial care 
ler temper had been framed, as if to make 
; L Being, who by adding love to peace 
light live on earth a life of happiness. 
Ier wedded Partner lacked not on his side 
,'he humble worth that satisfied her heart : 
, nigal, affectionate, sober, and withal 
keenly industrious. She with pride would tell 
hat he was often seated at his loom, 
h summer, ere the mower was abroad 
mong the dewy grass, — in early spring, 
•re the last star had vanished. — They who passed 
t evening, from behind the garden fence 
light hear his busy spade, which he would ply, 
iter his daily work, until the light 
lad failed, and every leaf and flower were lost 

In the dark hedges. So their days were spent 
In peace and comfort ; and a pretty boy 
Was their best hope, next to the God in heaven. 
Not twenty years ago, but you I think 
Can scarcely bear it now in mind, there came 
Two blighting seasons, when the fields were left 
With half a harvest. It pleased Heaven to add 
A worse affliction in the plague of war : 
This happy Land was stricken to the heart '. 
A Wanderer then among the cottages, 
I, with my freight of winter raiment, saw 
The hardships of that season : many rich 
Sank down, as in a dream, among the poor ; 
And of the poor did many cease to be, 
And their place knew them not. Meanwhile, 
abridged 
Of daily comforts, gladly reconciled 
To numerous self-denials, Margaret 
Went straggling on through those calamitous years 
With cheerful hope, until the second autumn, 
When her life's Helpmate on a sick-bed lay, 
Smitten with perilous fever. In disease 
He lingered long ; and, when his strength returned, 
He found the little he had stored, to meet 
The hour of accident or crippling age, 
Was all consumed. A second infant now 
Was added to the troubles of a time 
Laden, for them and all of their degree, 
With care and sorrow : shoals of artisans 
From ill-requited labour turned adrift 
Sought daily bread from public charity, 
They, and their wives and children — happier far 
Could they have lived as do the little birds 
That peck along the hedge-rows, or the kite 
That makes her dwelling on the mountain rocks ! 
A sad reverse it was for him who long 
Had filled with plenty, and possessed in peace, 
This lonely Cottage. At the door he stood, 
And whistled many a snatch of merry tunes 
That had no mirth in them ; or with his knife 
Carved uncouth figures on the heads of sticks — . 
Then, not less idly, sought, through every nook 
In house or garden, any casual work 
Of use or ornament ; and with a strange, 
Amusing, yet uneasy, novelty, 
He mingled, where he might, the various tasks 
Of summer, autumn, winter, and of spring. 
But this endured not ; his good humour soon 
Became a weight in which no pleasure was : 
And poverty brought on a petted mood 
And a sore temper : day by day he drooped, 
And he would leave his work — and to the town 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Would turn without an errand his slack steps ; 
Or wander here and there among the fields. 
One while he would speak lightly of his babes, 
And with a cruel tongue : at other times 
He tossed them with a false unnatural joy : 
And 'twas a rueful thing to see the looks 
Of the poor innocent children. ' Every smile,' 
Said Margaret to me, here beneath these trees, 
' Made my heart bleed.' " 
At this the Wanderer paused ; 
And, looking up to those enormous elms, 
He said, " 'Tis now the hour of deepest noon. 
At this still season of repose and peace, 
This hour when all things which are not at rest 
Are cheerful ; while this multitude of flies 
With tuneful hum is filling all the air ; 
Why should a tear be on an old Man's cheek  
Why should we thus, with an untoward mind, 
And in the weakness of humanity, 
From natural wisdom turn our hearts away ; 
To natural comfort shut our eyes and ears ; 
And, feeding on disquiet, thus disturb 
The calm of nature with our restless thoughts? " 

He spake with somewhat of a solemn tone : 
But, when he ended, there was in his face 
Such easy cheerfulness, a look so mild, 
That for a little time it stole away 
All recollection ; and that simple tale 
Passed from my mind like a forgotten sound. 
A while on trivial things we held discourse, 
To me soon tasteless. In my own despite, 
I thought of that poor Woman as of one 
Whom I had known and loved. He had rehearsed 
Her homely tale with such familiar power, 
With such an active countenance, an eye 
So busy, that the things of which he spake 
Seemed present ; and, attention now relaxed, 
A heart-felt chillness crept along my veins. 
I rose ; and, having left the breezy shade, 
Stood drinking comfort from the warmer sun, 
That had not cheered me long — ere, looking round 
Upon that tranquil Ruin, I returned, 
And begged of the old Man that, for my sake, 
He would resume his story. 
He replied, 
" It were a wantonness, and would demand 
Severe reproof, if we were men whose hearts 
Could hold vain dalliance with the misery 
Even of the dead ; contented thence to draw 
A momentary pleasure, never marked 
By reason, barren of all future good. 



But we have known that there is often found 
In mournful thoughts, and always might be found 
A power to virtue friendly ; wer 't not so. 
I am a dreamer among men, indeed 
An idle dreamer ! 'Tis a common tale, 
An ordinary sorrow of man's life, 
A tale of silent suffering, hardly clothed 
In bodily form. — But without further bidding 
I will proceed. 
While thus it fared with them, 
To whom this cottage, till those hapless years, 
Had been a blessed home, it was my chance 
To travel in a country far remote ; 
And when these lofty elms once more appeared 
What pleasant expectations lured me on 
O'er the flat Common ! — With quick step I reached 
The threshold, lifted with light hand the latch ; 
But, when I entered, Margaret looked at me 
A little while ; then turned her head away 
Speechless,— and, sitting down upon a chair, 
Wept bitterly. I wist not what to do, 
Nor how to speak to her. Poor Wretch ! at last 
She rose from off her seat, and then, — Sir ! 
I cannot tell how she pronounced my name : — 
With fervent love, and with a face of grief 
Unutterably helpless, and a look 
That seemed to cling upon me, she enquired 
If I had seen her husband. As she spake 
A strange surprise and fear came to my heart, 
Nor had I power to answer ere she told 
That he had disappeared — not two months gone. 
He left his house : two wretched days had past, 
And on the third, as wistfully she raised 
Her head from off her pillow, to look forth, 
Like one in trouble, for returning light, 
Within her chamber-casement she espied 
A folded paper, lying as if placed 
To meet her waking eyes. This tremblingly 
She opened — found no writing, but beheld 
Pieces of money carefully enclosed, 
Silver and gold. ' I shuddered at the sight,' 
Said Margaret, ' for I knew it was his hand 
That must have placed it there ; and ere that day 
Was ended, that long anxious day, I learned, 
From one who by my husband had been sent 
With the sad news, that he had joined a troop 
Of soldiers, going to a distant land. 
— He left me thus — he could not gather heart 
To take a farewell of me ; for he feared 
That I should follow with my babes, and sink 
Beneath the misery of that wandering life.' 
This tale did Margaret tell with many tears : 
And, when she ended, I had little power 

THE WANDERER. 

 

To give her comfort, and was glad to take 
i Such words of hope from her own mouth as served 
To cheer us both. But long we had not talked 
Ere we built up a pile of better thoughts, 
And with a brighter eye she looked around 
As if she had been shedding tears of joy. 
We parted. — 'Twas the time of early spring ; 
I left her busy with her garden tools ; 
And well remember, o'er that fence she looked, 
: And, while I paced along the foot- way path, 
Called out, and sent a blessing after me, 
With tender cheerfulness, and with a voice 
That seemed the very sound of happy thoughts. 

I roved o'er many a hill and many a dale, 
With my accustomed load ; in heat and cold, 
Through many a wood and many an open ground, 
In sunshine and in shade, in wet and fair, 
Drooping or blithe of heart, as might befal ; 
My best companions now the driving winds, 
And now the ' trotting brooks ' and whispering 
trees, 
And now the music of my own sad steps, 
With many a short-lived thought that passed 
between, 
And disappeared. 
I journeyed back this way, 
When, in the warmth of midsummer, the wheat 
Was yellow ; and the soft and bladed grass, 
' : Springing afresh, had o'er the hay-field spread 
Its tender verdure. At the door arrived, 
  found that she was absent. In the shade, 
 Where now we sit, I waited her return. 
Her cottage, then a cheerful object, wore 
' Its customary look, — only, it seemed, 
; The honeysuckle, crowding round the porch, 
Hung down in heavier tufts ; and that bright weed, 
The yellow stone-crop, suffered to take root 
I Along the window's edge, profusely grew 
j Blinding the lower panes. I turned aside, 
And strolled into her garden. It appeared 
To lag behind the season, and had lost 
' Its pride of neatness. Daisy-flowers and thrift 
' Had broken their trim border-lines, and straggled 
O'er paths they used to deck : carnations, once 
Prized for surpassing beauty, and no less 
i For the peculiar pains they had required, 
 Declined their languid heads, wanting support. 
I The cumbrous bind- weed, with its wreaths and bells, 
' Had twined about her two small rows of peas, 
'■ And dragged them to the earth. 
Ere this an hour 
! Was wasted. — Back I turned my restless steps ; 
A stranger passed ; and, guessing whom I sought 

He said that she was used to ramble far. — 
The sun was sinking in the west ; and now 
I sate with sad impatience. From within 
Her solitary infant cried aloud ; 
Then, like a blast that dies away self-stilled, 
The voice was silent. From the bench I rose ; 
But neither could divert nor soothe my thoughts. 
The spot, though fair, was very desolate — 
The longer I remained, more desokte : 
And, looking round me, now I first observed 
The corner stones, on either side the porch, 
With dull red stains discoloured, and stuck o'er 
With tufts and hairs of wool, as if the sheep, 
That fed upon the Common, thither came 
Familiarly, and found a couching-place 
Even at her threshold. Deeper shadows fell 
From these tall elms; the cottage-clock struck 
eight ;— 
I turned, and saw her distant a few steps. 
Her face was pale and thin — her figure, too, 
Was changed. As she unlocked the door, she said, 
' It grieves me you have waited here so long, 
But, in good truth, I 've wandered much of late ; 
And, sometimes — to my shame I speak — have need 
Of my best prayers to bring me back again.' 
While on the board she spread our evening meal, 
She told me — interrupting not the work 
Which gave employment to her listless hands — 
That she had parted with her elder child ; 
To a kind master on a distant farm 
Now happily apprenticed. — ' I perceive 
You look at me, and you have cause ; to-day 
I have been travelling far ; and many days 
About the fields I wander, knowing this 
Only, that what I seek I cannot find ; 
And so I waste my time : for I am changed ; 
And to myself,' said she, e have done much wrong 
And to this helpless infant. I have slept 
Weeping, and weeping have I waked ; my tears 
Have flowed as if my body were not such 
As others are ; and I could never die. 
But I am now in mind and in my heart 
More easy ; and I hope,' said she, ' that God 
Will give me patience to endure the things 
Which I behold at home.' 
It would have grieved 
Your very soul to see her. Sir, I feel 
The story linger in my heart ; I fear 
'Tis long and tedious ; but my spirit clings 
To that poor Woman : — so familiarly 
Do I perceive her manner, and her look, 
And presence ; and so deeply do I feel 
Her goodness, that, not seldom, in my walks 
A momentary trance comes over me ; 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

And to myself I seem to muse on One 
By sorrow laid asleep ; or borne away, 
A human being destined to awake 
To human life, or something very near 
To human life, when he shall come again 
For whom she suffered. Yes, it would have grieved 
Your very soul to see her : evermore 
Her eyelids drooped, her eyes downward were cast; 
And, when she at her table gave me food, 
She did not look at me. Her voice was low, 
Her body was subdued. In every act, 
Pertaining to her house-affairs, appeared 
The careless stillness of a thinking mind 
Self- occupied ; to which all outward things 
Are like an idle matter. Still she sighed, 
But yet no motion of the breast was seen, 
No heaving of the heart. While by the fire 
We sate together, sighs came on my ear, 
I knew not how, and hardly whence they came. 
Ere my departure, to her care I gave, 
For her son's use, some tokens of regard, 
Which with a look of welcome she received ; 
And I exhorted her to place her trust 
In God's good love, and seek his help by prayer. 
I took my staff, and, when I kissed her babe, 
The tears stood in her eyes. I left her then 
With the best hope and comfort I could give : 
She thanked me for my wish ; — but for my hope 
It seemed she did not thank me. 
I returned, 
And took my rounds along this road again 
When on its sunny bank the primrose flower 
Peeped forth, to give an earnest of the Spring. 
I found her sad and drooping : she had learned 
No tidings of her husband ; if he lived, 
She knew not that he lived ; if he were dead, 
She knew not he was dead. She seemed the same 
In person and appearance ; but her house 
Bespake a sleepy hand of negligence ; 
The floor was neither dry nor neat, the hearth 
Was comfortless, and her small lot of books, 
Which, in the cottage-window, heretofore 
Had been piled up against the corner panes 
In seemly order, now, with straggling leaves 
Lay scattered here and there, open or shut, 
As they had chanced to fall. Her infant Babe 
Had from its Mother caught the trick of grief, 
And sighed among its playthings. I withdrew, 
And once again entering the garden saw, 
More plainly still, that poverty and grief 
Were now come nearer to her : weeds defaced 
The hardened soil, and knots of withered grass : 
No ridges there appeared of clear black mold, 

No winter greenness ; of her herbs and flowers, 
It seemed the better part were gnawed away 
Or trampled into earth ; a chain of straw, 
Which had been twined about the slender stem 
Of a young apple-tree, lay at its root ; 
The bark was nibbled round by truant sheep. 
— Margaret stood near, her infant in her arms, 
And, noting that my eye was on the tree, 
She said, ' I fear it will be dead and gone 
Ere Robert come again.' When to the House 
We had returned together, she enquired 
If I had any hope : — but for her babe 
And for her little orphan boy, she said, 
She had no wish to live, that she must die 
Of sorrow. Yet I saw the idle loom 
Still in its place ; his Sunday garments hung 
Upon the self-same nail ; his very staff 
Stood undisturbed behind the door. 
And when, 
In bleak December, I retraced this way, 
She told me that her little babe was dead, 
And she was left alone. She now, released 
From her maternal cares, had taken up 
The employment common through these wilds, and 
gained, 
By spinning hemp, a pittance for herself ; 
And for this end had hired a neighbour's boy 
To give her needful help. That very time 
Most willingly she put her work aside, 
And walked with me along the miry road, 
Heedless how far ; and, in such piteous sort 
That any heart had ached to hear her, begged 
That, wheresoe'er I went, I still would ask 
For him whom she had lost. We parted then — 
Our final parting ; for from that time forth 
Did many seasons pass ere  returned 
Into this tract again. 
Nine tedious years ; 
From their first separation, nine long years, 
She lingered in unquiet widowhood ; 
A Wife and Widow. Needs must it have been 
A sore heart-wasting ! I have heard, my Friend, 
That in yon arbour oftentimes she sate 
Alone, through half the vacant sabbath day ; 
And, if a dog passed by, she still would quit 
The shade, and look abroad. On this old bench 
For hours she sate ; and evermore her eye 
Was busy in the distance, shaping things 
That made her heart beat quick. You see that path, 
Now faint, — the grass has crept o'er its grey Une ; 
There, to and fro, she paced through many a day 
Of the warm summer, from a belt of hemp 
That girt her waist, spinning the long-drawn thread 
With backward steps. Yet ever as there passed 

THE WANDERER. 

 

A man whose garments showed the soldier's red, 
I Or crippled mendicant in sailor's garb, 
The little child who sate to turn the wheel 
Ceased from his task ; and she with faltering voice 
Made many a fond enquiry ; and when they, 
Whose presence gave no comfort, were gone by, 
Her heart was still more sad. And by yon gate, 
That bars the traveller's road, she often stood, 
And when a stranger horseman came, the latch 
Would lift, and in his face look wistfully : 
Most happy, if, from aught discovered there 
Of tender feeling, she might dare repeat 
The same sad question. Meanwhile her poor Hut 
Sank to decay ; for he was gone, whose hand, 
At the first nipping of October frost, 
Closed up each chink, and with fresh bands of straw 
Chequered the green-grown thatch. And so she lived 
Through the long winter, reckless and alone ; 
Until her house by frost, and thaw, and rain, 
Was sapped ; and while she slept, the nightly damps 
Did chill her breast ; and in the stormy day 
Her tattered clothes were ruffled by the wind, 
Even at the side of her own fire. Yet still 
She loved this wretched spot, nor would for worlds 
Have parted hence ; and still that length of road, 
And this rude bench, one torturing hope endeared, 
Fast rooted at her heart : and here, my Friend, — 
In sickness she remained ; and here she died ; 
Last human tenant of these ruined walls ! " 
The old Man ceased : he saw that I was moved ; 
From that low bench, rising instinctively 
I turned aside in weakness, nor had power 
To thank him for the tale which he had told. 
I stood, and leaning o'er the garden wall 
Reviewed that Woman's sufferings ; and it seemed 
To comfort me while with a brother's love 
I blessed her in the impotence of grief. 
Then towards the cottage T returned ; and traced 
Fondly, though with an interest more mild, 
That secret spirit of humanity 
Which, 'mid the calm oblivious tendencies 
Of nature, 'mid her plants, and weeds, and flowers, 

And silent overgrowings, still survived. 
The old Man, noting this, resumed, and said, 
"My Friend ! enough to sorrow you have given, 
The purposes of wisdom ask no more : 
Nor more would she have craved as due to One 
Who, in her worst distress, had ofttimes felt 
The unbounded might of prayer ; and learned, with 
soul 
Fixed on the Cross, that consolation springs, 
From sources deeper far than deepest pain, 
For the meek Sufferer. Why then should we read 
The forms of things with an unworthy eye  
She sleeps in the calm earth, and peace is here. 
I well remember that those very plumes, 
Those weeds, and the high spear-grass on that wall, 
By mist and silent rain-drops silvered o'er, 
As once I passed, into my heart conveyed 
So still an image of tranquillity, 
So calm and still, and looked so beautiful 
Amid the uneasy thoughts which filled my mind, 
That what we feel of sorrow and despair 
From ruin and from change, and all the grief 
That passing shows of Being leave behind, 
Appeared an idle dream, that could maintain, 
Nowhere, dominion o'er the enlightened spirit 
Whose meditative sympathies repose 
Upon the breast of Faith. I turned away, 
And walked along my road in happiness." 
He ceased. Ere long the sun declining shot 
A slant and mellow radiance, which began 
To fall upon us, while, beneath the trees, 
We sate on that low bench : and now we felt, 
Admonished thus, the sweet hour coming on. 
A linnet warbled from those lofty elms, 
A thrush sang loud, and other melodies, 
At distance heard, peopled the milder air. 
The old Man rose, and, with a sprightly mien 
Of hopeful preparation, grasped his staff; 
Together casting then a farewell look 
Upon those silent walls, we left the shade ; 
And, ere the stars were visible, had reached 
A village-inn, — our evening resting-place. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

BOOK SECOND. 

THE SOLITARY. 
ARGUMENT. 
The Author describes his travels with the Wanderer, 
whose character is further illustrated — Morning scene, 
and view of a Village Wake — Wanderer's account of a 
Friend whom he purposes to visit — View, from an emi- 
nence, of the Valley which his Friend had chosen for 
his retreat — Sound of singing from below — a funeral 
procession — Descent into the Valley — Observations 
drawn from the Wanderer at sight of a book accident- 
ally discovered in a recess in the Valley — Meeting with 
the Wanderer's friend, the Solitary — Wanderer's descrip- 
tion of the mode of burial in this mountainous district 
— Solitary contrasts with this, that of the individual 
carried a few minutes before from the cottage — The 
cottage entered — Description of the Solitary's apartment 
— Repast there — View, from the window, of two moun- 
tain summits ; and the Solitary's description of the com- 
panionship they afford him — Account of the departed 
inmate of the cottage — Description of a grand spectacle 
upon the mountains, with its effect upon the Solitary's 
mind — Leave the house. 
In days of yore how fortunately fared 
The Minstrel ! wandering on from hall to hall, 
Baronial court or royal ; cheered with gifts 
Munificent, and love, and ladies' praise ; 
Now meeting on his road an armed knight. 
Now resting with a pilgrim hy the side 
Of a clear brook ; — beneath an abbey's roof 
One evening sumptuously lodged ; the next, 
Humbly in a religious hospital ; 
Or with some merry outlaws of the wood ; 
Or haply shrouded in a hermit's ceU. 
Him, sleeping or awake, the robber spared ; 
He walked — protected from the sword of war 
By virtue of that sacred instrument 
His harp, suspended at the traveller's side ; 
His dear companion wheresoe'er he went 
Opening from land to land an easy way 
By melody, and by the charm of verse. 
Yet not the noblest of that honoured Race 
Drew happier, loftier, more empassioned, thoughts 
From his long journeyings and eventful life, 
Than this obscure Itinerant had skill 
To gather, ranging through the tamer ground 
Of these our unimaginative days ; 
Both while he trod the earth in humblest guise 
Accoutred with his burthen and his staff ; 
And now, when free to move with lighter pace. 
What wonder, then, if I, whose favourite school 
Hath been the fields, the roads, and rural lanes, 

Looked on this guide with reverential love ? 
Each with the other pleased, we now pursued 
Our journey, under favourable skies. 
Turn wheresoe'er we would, he was a light 
Unfailing : not a hamlet could we pass, 
Rarely a house, that did not yield to him 
Remembrances ; or from his tongue call forth 
Some way-beguiling tale. Nor less regard 
Accompanied those strains of apt discourse, 
Which nature's various objects might inspire ; 
And in the silence of his face I read 
His overflowing spirit. Birds and beasts, 
And the mute fish that glances in the stream, 
And harmless reptile coiling in the sun, 
And gorgeous insect hovering in the air, 
The fowl domestic, and the household dog — 
In his capacious mind, he loved them all : 
Their rights acknowledging he felt for all. 
Oft was occasion given me to perceive 
How the calm pleasures of the pasturing herd 
To happy contemplation soothed his walk ; 
How the poor brute's condition, forced to hid 
Its course of suffering in the public road, 
Sad contrast ! all too often smote his heart 
With unavailing pity. Rich in love 
And sweet humanity, he was, himself, 
To the degree that he desired, beloved. 
Smiles of good-will from faces that he knew 
Greeted us all day long ; we took our seats 
By many a cottage-hearth, where he received 
The welcome of an Inmate from afar, 
And I at once forgot, I was a Stranger. 
— Nor was he loth to enter ragged huts, 
Huts where his charity was blest ; his voice 
Heard as the voice of an experienced friend. 
And, sometimes — where the poor man held dispute 
With his own mind, unable to subdue 
Impatience through inaptness to perceive 
General distress in his particular lot ; 
Or cherishing resentment, or in vain 
Struggling against it ; with a sold perplexed, 
And finding in herself no steady power 
To draw the line of comfort that divides 
Calamity, the chastisement of Heaven, 
From the injustice of our brother men — 
To him appeal was made as to a judge ; 
Who, with an understanding heart, allayed 
The perturbation ; listened to the plea ; 
Resolved the dubious point ; and sentence gave 

> ■ f 

- 

THE SOLITARY. 

 

So grounded, so applied, that it was heard 
With softened spirit, even when it condemned. 
Such intercourse I witnessed, while we roved, 
(Now as his choice directed, now as mine ; 
Or both, with equal readiness of will, 
'Our course submitting to the changeful breeze 
: Of accident. But when the rising sun 
'Had three times called us to renew our walk, 
i My Fellow-traveller, with earnest voice, 
(As if the thought were but a moment old, 
'Claimed absolute dominion for the day. 
We started — and he led me toward the hills, 
;Up through an ample vale, with higher hills 
Before us, mountains stern and desolate ; 
;But,in the majesty of distance, now 
jSet off, and to our ken appearing fair 
■Of aspect, with aerial softness clad, 
And beautified with morning's purple beams. 
, The wealthy, the luxurious, by the stress 
Of business roused, or pleasure, ere their time, 
May roll in chariots, or provoke the hoofs 
j Of the fleet coursers they bestride, to raise 
From earth the dust of morning, slow to rise ; 
And they, if blest with health and hearts at ease, 
Shall lack not their enjoyment: — but how faint 
Compared with ours ! who, pacing side by side, 
Could, with an eye of leisure, look on all 
That we beheld ; and lend the listening sense 
To every grateful sound of earth and air ; 
Pausing at will — our spirits braced, our thoughts 
Pleasant as roses in the thickets blown, 
I And pure as dew bathing their crimson leaves. 
Mount slowly, sun ! that we may journey long, 
By this dark hill protected from thy beams ! 
Such is the summer pilgrim's frequent wish ; 
But quickly from among our morning thoughts 
Twas chased away : for, toward the western side 
Of the broad vale, casting a casual glance, 
We saw a throng of people ; — wherefore met ? 
Blithe notes of music, suddenly let loose 
On the thrilled ear, and flags uprising, yield 
Prompt answer ; they proclaim the annual Wake, 
Which the bright season favours. — Tabor and pipe 
In purpose join to hasten or reprove 
The laggard Rustic ; and repay with boons 
Of merriment a party-coloured knot, 
Already formed upon the village-green. 
i|— Beyond the limits of the shadow cast 
IBy the broad hill, glistened upon our sight 
|That gay assemblage. Round them and above, 
|: Glitter, with dark recesses interposed, 

Casement, and cottage-roof, and stems of trees 
Half- veiled in vapoury cloud, the silver steam 
Of dews fast melting on their leafy boughs 
By the strong sunbeams smitten. Like a mast 
Of gold, the Maypole shines ; as if the rays 
Of morning, aided by exhaling dew, 
With gladsome influence could re-animate 
The faded garlands dangling from its sides. 
Said I, " The music and the sprightly scene 
Invite us ; shall we quit our road, and join 
These festive matins ? " — He replied, " Not loth 
To linger I would here with you partake, 
Not one hour merely, but till evening's close, 
The simple pastimes of the day and place. 
By the fleet Racers, ere the sun be set, 
The turf of yon large pasture will be skimmed ; 
There, too, the lusty Wrestlers shall contend : 
But know we not that he, who intermits 
The appointed task and duties of the day, 
Untunes full oft the pleasures of the day ; 
Checking the finer spirits that refuse 
To flow, when purposes are lightly changed \ 
A length of journey yet remains un traced : 
Let us proceed." Then, pointing with his staff 
Raised toward those craggy summits, his intent 
He thus imparted : — 
" In a spot that lies 
Among yon mountain fastnesses concealed, 
You will receive, before the hour of noOn, 
Good recompense, I hope, for this day's toil, 
From sight of One who lives secluded there, 
Lonesome and lost : of whom, and whose past life, 
(Not to forestall such knowledge as may be 
More faithfully collected from himself) 
This brief communication shall suffice. 
Though now sojourning there, he, like myself, 
Sprang from a stock of lowly parentage 
Among the wilds of Scotland, hi a tract 
Where many a sheltered and well-tended plant, 
Bears, on the humblest ground of social life, 
Blossoms of piety and innocence. 
Such grateful promises his youth displayed : 
And, having shown in study forward zeal, 
He to the Ministry was duly called ; 
And straight, incited by a curious mind 
Filled with vague hopes, he undertook the charge 
Of Chaplain to a military troop 
Cheered by the Highland bagpipe, as they marched 
In plaided vest, — his fellow-countrymen. 
This office filling, yet by native power 
And force of native inclination made 
An intellectual ruler in the haunts 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

- 

Of social vanity, he walked the world, 
Gay, and affecting graceful gaiety ; 
Lax, buoyant — less a pastor with his flock 
Than a soldier among soldiers — lived and roamed 
Where Fortune led : — and Fortune, who oft proves 
The careless wanderer's friend, to him made known 
A blooming Lady — a conspicuous flower, 
Admired for beauty, for her sweetness praised ; 
Whom he had sensibility to love, 
Ambition to attempt, and skill to win. 
For this fair Bride, most rich in gifts of mind, 
Nor sparingly endowed with worldly wealth, 
His office he relinquished ; and retired 
From the world's notice to a rural home. 
Youth's season yet with him was scarcely past, 
And she was in youth's prime. How free their love, 
How full their joy ! 'Till, pitiable doom ! 
In the short course of one undreaded year, 
Death blasted all. Death suddenly o'erthrew 
Two lovely Children — all that they possessed ! 
The Mother followed : — miserably bare 
The one Survivor stood ; he wept, he prayed 
For his dismissal, day and night, compelled 
To hold communion with the grave, and face 
With pain the regions of eternity. 
An uncomplaining apathy displaced 
This anguish ; and, indifferent to delight, 
To aim and purpose, he consumed his days, 
To private interest dead, and public care. 
So lived he ; so he might have died. 
But now, 
To the wide world's astonishment, appeared 
A glorious opening, the unlooked-for dawn, 
That promised everlasting joy to France ! 
Her voice of social transport reached even him I 
He broke from his contracted bounds, repaired 
To the great City, an emporium then 
Of golden expectations, and receiving 
Freights every day from a new world of hope. 
Thither his popular talents he transferred ; 
And, from the pulpit, zealously maintained 
The cause of Christ and civil liberty, 
As one, and moving to one glorious end. 
Intoxicating service ! I might say 
A happy service ; for he was sincere 
As vanity and fondness for applause, 
And new and shapeless wishes, would allow. 
That righteous cause (such power hath freedom) 
bound, 
For one hostility, in friendly league, 
Ethereal natures and the worst of slaves ; 
Was served by rival advocates that came 

From regions opposite as heaven and hell. 
One courage seemed to animate them all : 
And, from the dazzling conquests daily gained 
By their united efforts, there arose 
A proud and most presumptuous confidence 
In the transcendent wisdom of the age, 
And her discernment ; not alone in rights, 
And in the origin and bounds of power 
Social and temporal ; but in laws divine, 
Deduced by reason, or to faith revealed. 
An overweening trust was raised ; and fear 
Cast out, alike of person and of thing. 
Plague from this union spread, whose subtle bane 
The strongest did not easily escape ; 
And He, what wonder ! took a mortal taint. 
How shall I trace the change, how bear to tell 
That he broke faith with them whom he had laid 
In earth's dark chambers, with a Christian's hope! 
An infidel contempt of holy writ 
Stole by degrees upon his mind ; and hence 
Life, like that Roman Janus, double-faced ; 
Vilest hypocrisy — the laughing, gay 
Hypocrisy, not leagued with fear, but pride. 
Smooth words he had to wheedle simple souls ; 
But, for disciples of the inner school, 
Old freedom was old servitude, and they 
The wisest whose opinions stooped the least 
To known restraints ; and who most boldly drew 
Hopeful prognostications from a creed, 
That, in the light of false philosophy, 
Spread like a halo round a misty moon, 
Widening its circle as the storms advance. 
His sacred function was at length renounced ; 
And every day and every place enjoyed 
The unshackled layman's natural liberty ; 
Speech, manners, morals, all without disguise. 
 do not wish to wrong him ; though the course 
Of private life licentiously displayed 
Unhallowed actions — planted like a crown 
Upon the insolent aspiring brow 
Of spurious notions — worn as open signs 
Of prejudice subdued — still he retained, 
'Mid much abasement, what he had received 
From nature, an intense and glowing mind. 
Wherefore, when humbled Liberty grew weak, 
And mortal sickness on her face appeared, 
He coloured objects to his own desire 
As with a lover's passion. Yet his moods 
Of pain were keen as those of better men, 
Nay keener, as his fortitude was less : 
And he continued, when worse days were come, 
To deal about his sparkling eloquence, 
Struggling against the strange reverse with zeal 


THE SOLITARY. 

 

That shewed like happiness. But, in despite 
< Of all this outside bravery, within, 
i He neither felt encouragement nor hope : • 
i For moral dignity, and strength of mind, 
"Were wanting ; and simplicity of life ; 
And reverence for himself; and, last and best, 
! Confiding thoughts, through love and fear of Him 
Before whose sight the troubles of this world 
Are vain, as billows in a tossing sea. 
The glory of the times fading away — 
' The splendor, which had given a festal air 
i To self-importance, hallowed it, and veiled 
From his own sight — this gone, he forfeited 
t All joy in human nature ; was consumed, 
! And vexed, and chafed, by levity and scorn, 
I And fruitless indignation ; galled by pride ; 
i Made desperate by contempt of men who throve 
: Before his sight in power or fame, and won, 
Without desert, what he desired ; weak men, 
, Too weak even for his envy or his hate ! 
Tormented thus, after a wandering course 
Of discontent, and inwardly opprest 
With malady — in part, I fear, provoked 
i By weariness of life — he fixed his home, 
j Or, rather say, sate down by very chance, 
j Among these rugged hills ; where now he dwells, 
| And wastes the sad remainder of his hours, 
Steeped in a self-indulging spleen, that wants not 
ilts own voluptuousness ; — on this resolved, 
With this content, that he will live and die 
Forgotten, — at safe distance from ' a world 
Not moving to his mind.' " 
These serious words 
i Closed the preparatory notices 
That served my Fellow-traveller to beguile 
The way, while we advanced up that wide vale, 
f Diverging now (as if his quest had been 
I Some secret of the mountains, cavern, fall 
Of water, or some lofty eminence, 
Renowned for splendid prospect far and wide) 
: We scaled, without a track to ease our steps, 
i A steep ascent ; and reached a dreary plain, 
, With a tumultuous waste of huge hill tops 
Before us ; savage region ! which I paced 
Dispirited : when, all at once, behold ! 
! Beneath our feet, a little lowly vale, 
' A lowly vale, and yet uplifted high 
Among the mountains ; even as if the spot 
[Had been from eldest time by wish of theirs 
j So placed, to be shut out from all the world ! 
I Urn-like it was in shape, deep as an urn ; 
With rocks encompassed, save that to the south 
Was one small opening, where a heath-clad ridge 

Supplied a boundary less abrupt and close ; 
A quiet treeless nook, with two green fields, 
A liquid pool that glittered in the sun, 
And one bare dwelling ; one abode, no more ! 
It seemed the home of poverty and toil, 
Though not of want : the little fields, made green 
By husbandry of many thrifty years, 
Paid cheerful tribute to the moorland house. 
— There crows the cock, single in his domain : 
The small birds find in spring no thicket there 
To shroud them; only from the neighbouring vales 
The cuckoo, straggling up to the hill tops, 
Shouteth faint tidings of some gladder place. 
Ah ! what a sweet Recess, thought I, is here ! 
Instantly throwing down my limbs at ease 
Upon a bed of heath ; — full many a spot 
Of hidden beauty have I chanced to espy 
Among the mountains ; never one like this ; 
So lonesome, and so perfectly secure ; 
Not melancholy — no, for it is green, 
And bright, and fertile, furnished in itself 
With the few needful things that life requires. 
—In rugged arms how softly does it lie, 
How tenderly protected ! Far and near 
We have an image of the pristine earth, 
The planet in its nakedness : were this 
Man's only dwelling, sole appointed seat, 
First, last, and single, in the breathing world, 
It could not be more quiet : peace is here 
Or nowhere ; days unruffled by the gale 
Of public news or private ; years that pass 
Forgetfully ; uncalled upon to pay 
The common penalties of mortal life, 
Sickness, or accident, or grief, or pain. 
On these and kindred thoughts intent I lay 
In silence musing by my Comrade's side, 
He also silent ; when from out the heart 
Of that profound abyss a solemn voice, 
Or several voices in one solemn sound, 
Was heard ascending ; mournful, deep, and slow 
The cadence, as of psalms — a funeral dirge ! 
We listened, looking down upon the hut, 
But seeing no one : meanwhile from below 
The strain continued, spiritual as before ; 
And now distinctly could I recognise 
These words : — ' Shall in the grave thy love be known, 
In death thy faithfulness ? ' — " God rest his soul ! " 
Said the old man, abruptly breaking silence, — 
" He is departed, and finds peace at last ! " 
This scarcely spoken, and those holy strains 
Not ceasing, forth appeared in view a band 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Of rustic persons, from behind the hut 
Bearing a coffin in the midst, with which 
They shaped their course along the sloping side 
Of that small valley, singing as they moved ; 
A sober company and few, the men 
Bare-headed, and all decently attired ! 
Some steps when they had thus advanced, the 
dirge 
Ended ; and, from the stillness that ensued 
Recovering, to my Friend I said, " You spake, 
Methought, with apprehension that these rites 
Are paid to Him upon whose shy retreat 
This day we purposed to intrude." — " I did so, 
But let us hence, that we may learn the truth : 
Perhaps it is not he but some one else 
For whom this pious service is performed ; 
Some other tenant of the solitude." 
So, to a steep and difficult descent 
Trusting ourselves, we wound from crag to crag, 
Where passage could be won ; and, as the last 
Of the mute train, behind the heathy top 
Of that off-sloping outlet, disappeared, 
I, more impatient in my downward course, 
Had landed upon easy ground ; and there 
Stood waiting for my Comrade. When behold 
An object that enticed my steps aside ! 
A narrow, winding, entry opened out 
Into a platform — that lay, sheepfold-wise, 
Enclosed between- an upright mass of rock 
And one old moss-grown wall ; — a cool recess, 
And fanciful ! For where the rock and wall 
Met in an angle, hung a penthouse, framed- 
By thrusting two rude staves into the wall 
And overlaying them with mountain sods ; 
To weather-fend a little turf-built seat 
Whereon a full-grown man might rest, nor dread 
The burning sunshine, or a transient shower ; 
But the whole plainly wrought by children's hands ! 
Whose skill had thronged the floor with a proud 
show 
Of baby-houses, curiously arranged ; 
Nor wanting ornament of walks between, 
With mimic trees inserted in the turf, 
And gardens interposed. Pleased with the sight, 
I could not choose but beckon to my Guide, 
Who, entering, round him tlirew a careless glance, 
Impatient to pass on, when I exclaimed, 
" Lo ! what is here ? " and, stooping down, drew 
forth 
A book, that, in the midst of stones and moss 
And wreck of party-coloured earthen-ware, 
Aptly disposed, had lent its help to raise 
One of those petty structures. " His it must be !" 

Exclaimed the Wanderer, " cannot but be his, 
And he is gone ! " The book, which hi my hand 
Had opened of itself (for it was swoln 
With searching damp, and seemingly had lain 
To the injurious elements exposed 
From week to week,) I found to be a work 
In the French tongue, a Novel of Voltaire, 
His famous Optimist. u Unhappy Man! " 
Exclaimed my Friend : "here then has been to him 
Retreat within retreat, a sheltering-place 
Within how deep a shelter ! He had fits, 
Even to the last, of genuine tenderness, 
And loved the haunts of children : here, no doubt, 
Pleasing and pleased, he shared their simple sports, 
Or sate companionless ; and here the book, 
Left and forgotten in his careless way, 
Must by the cottage-children have been found : 
Heaven bless them, and their inconsiderate work ! 
To what odd purpose have the darlings turned 
This sad memorial of their hapless friend ! " 
" Me, " said I, " most doth it surprise, to find 
Such book in such a place ! " — " A book it is," 
He answered, " to the Person suited well, 
Though little suited to surrounding things : 
'Tis strange, I grant ; and stranger still had been 
To see the Man who owned it, dwelling here, 
With one poor shepherd, far from all the world ! — 
Now, if our errand hath been thrown away, 
As from these intimations I forebode, 
Grieved shall I be — less for my sake than yours, 
And least of all for him who is no more." 
By this, the book was in the old Man's hand ; 
And he continued, glancing on the leaves 
An eye of scorn : — " The lover," said he, " doomed 
To love when hope hath failed him — whom no 
depth 
Of privacy is deep enough to hide, 
Hath yet his bracelet or his lock of hair, 
And that is joy to him. When change of times 
Hath summoned kings to scaffolds, do but give 
The faithful servant, who must hide his head 
Henceforth in whatsoever nook he may 
A kerchief sprinkled with his master's blood, 
And he too hath his comforter. How poor, 
Beyond all poverty how destitute, 
Must that Man have been left, who, hither driven, 
Flying or seeking, could yet bring with him 
No dearer relique, and no better stay, 
Than this dull product of a scoffer's pen, 
Impure conceits discharging from a heart 
Hardened by impious pride ! — I did not fear 
To tax you with this journey ; " — mildly said 

I 

THE SOLITARY. 

 

•My venerable Friend, as forth we stepped 
Into the presence of the cheerful light — 
" For I have knowledge that you do not shrink 
From moving spectacles ; — but let us on." 
So speaking, on he went, and at the word 
I followed, till he made a sudden stand : 
For full in view, approaching through a gate 
That opened from the enclosure of green fields 
Into the rough uncultivated ground, 
Behold the Man whom he had fancied dead ! 
I knew from his deportment, mien, and dress, 
That it could be no other ; a pale face, 
A meagre person, tall, and in a garb 
Not rustic — dull and faded like himself ! 
He saw us not, though distant but few steps ; 
For he was busy, dealing, from a store 
Upon a broad leaf carried, choicest strings 
Of red ripe currants ; gift by which he strove, 
With intermixture of endearing words, 
To soothe a Child, who walked beside him, weeping 
As if disconsolate. — " They to the grave 
|Are bearing him, my Little- one," he said, 
: 'To the dark pit ; but he will feel no pain; 
His body is at rest, his soul in heaven." 
More might have followed — but my honoured 
Friend 
Broke in upon the Speaker with a frank 
And cordial greeting. — Vivid was the light 
That flashed and sparkled from the other's eyes ; 
He was all fire : no shadow on his brow 
Remained, nor sign of sickness on his face. 
Hands joined he with his Visitant, — a grasp, 
An eager grasp ; and many moments' space — 
When the first glow of pleasure was no more, 
And, of the sad appearance which at once 
Had vanished, much was come and coming back— 
An amicable smile retained the life 
Which it had unexpectedly received, 
Upon his hollow cheek. " How kind," he said, 
'Nor could your coming have been better timed; 
For this, you see, is in our narrow world 
A day of sorrow. I have here a charge" — 
And, speaking thus, he patted tenderly 
The sun-burnt forehead of the weeping child — 
'A little mourner, whom it is my task 
Io comfort ; — but how came ye ? — if yon track 
(Which doth at once befriend us and betray) 
Conducted hither your most welcome feet, 
Ye could not miss the funeral train — they yet 
jHave scarcely disappeared." "This blooming 
Child," 
.Said the old Man, "is of an age to weep 

At any grave or solemn spectacle, 
Inly distressed or overpowered with awe, 
He knows not wherefore ; — but the boy to-day, 
Perhaps is shedding orphan's tears ; you also 
Must have sustained a loss." — " The hand of Death," 
He answered, "has been here ; but could not well 
Have fallen more lightly, if it had not fallen 
Upon myself." — The other left these words 
Unnoticed, thus continuing. — 
"From yon crag, 
Down whose steep sides we dropped into the vale, 
We heard the hymn they sang — a solemn sound 
Heard any where ; but iu a place like this 
'Tis more than human ! Many precious rites 
And customs of our rural ancestry 
Are gone, or stealing from us ; this, I hope, 
Will last for ever. Oft on my way have I 
Stood still, though but a casual passenger, 
So much I felt the awfulness of life, 
In that one moment when the corse is lifted 
In silence, with a hush of decency ; 
Then from the threshold moves with song of peace, 
And confidential yearnings, tow'rds its home, 
Its final home on earth. What traveller — who — 
(How far soe'er a stranger) does not own 
The bond of brotherhood, when he sees them go, 
A mute procession on the houseless road ; 
Or passing by some single tenement 
Or clustered dwellings, where again they raise 
The monitory voice ? But most of all 
It touches, it confirms, and elevates, 
Then, when the body, soon to be consigned 
Ashes to ashes, dust bequeathed to dust, 
Is raised from the church-aisle, and forward borne 
Upon the shoulders of the next in love, 
The nearest in affection or in blood ; 
Yea, by the very mourners who had knelt 
Beside the coffin, resting on its lid 
In silent grief their unuplifted heads, 
And heard meanwhile the Psalmist's mournful 
plaint, 
And that most awful scripture which declares 
We shall not sleep, but we shall all be changed ! 
— Have I not seen — ye likewise may have seen — 
Son, husband, brothers — brothers side by side, 
And son and father also side by side, 
Rise from that posture : — and in concert move, 
On the green turf following the vested Priest, 
Four dear supporters of one senseless weight, 
From which they do not shrink, and under which 
They faint not, but advance towards the open grave 
Step after step — together, with then firm 
Unhidden faces : he that suffers most, 
He outwardly, and inwardly perhaps, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

The most serene, with most undaunted eye ! — 
Oh ! blest are they who live and die like these, 
Loved with such love, and with such sorrow 
mourned ! " 
" That poor Man taken hence to-day," replied 
The Solitary, with a faint sarcastic smile 
Which did not please me, "must be deemed, I fear, 
Of the unblest ; for he will surely sink 
Into his mother earth without such pomp 
Of grief, depart without occasion given 
By him for such array of fortitude. 
Full seventy winters hath he lived, and mark ! 
This simple Child will mourn his one short hour, 
And I shall miss him ; scanty tribute ! yet, 
This wanting, he would leave the sight of men, 
If love were his sole claim upon their care, 
Like a ripe date which in the desert falls 
Without a hand to gather it." 
At this 
I interposed, though loth to speak, and said, 
" Can it be thus among so small a band 
As ye must needs be here ? in such a place 
I would not willingly, methinks, lose sight 
Of a departing cloud." — " 'Twas not for love " 
Answered the sick Man with a careless voice — 
" That I came hither ; neither have I found 
Among associates who have power of speech, 
Nor in such other converse as is here, 
Temptation so prevailing as to change 
That mood, or undermine my first resolve." 
Then, speaking in like careless sort, he said 
To my benign Companion, — " Pity 'tis 
That fortune did not guide you to this house 
A few days earlier ; then would you have seen 
What stuff the Dwellers in a solitude, 
That seems by Nature hollowed out to be 
The seat and bosom of pure innocence, 
Are made of ; an ungracious matter this ! 
Which, for truth's sake, yet in remembrance too 
Of past discussions with this zealous friend 
And advocate of humble life, I now 
Will force upon his notice ; undeterred 
By the example of his own pure course, 
And that respect and deference which a soul 
May fairly claim, by niggard age enriched 
In what she most doth value, love of God 
And his frail creature Man ; — but ye shall hear. 
I talk — and ye are standing in the sun 
Without refreshment ! " 
Quickly had he spoken, 
And, with light steps still quicker than his words, 
Led toward the Cottage. Homely was the spot ; 
And, to my feeling, ere we reached the door, 

Had almost a forbidding nakedness; 
Less fair, I grant, even painfully less fair, 
Than it appeared when from the beetling roek 
We had looked down upon it. All within, 
As left by the departed company, 
Was silent ; save the solitary clock 
That on mine ear ticked with a mournful sound. — 
Following our Guide, we clomb the cottage-stairs 
And reached a small apartment dark and low, 
Which was no sooner entered than our Host 
Said gaily, " This is my domain, my cell, 
My hermitage, my cabin, what you will — 
I love it better than a snail his house. 
But now ye shall be feasted with our best." 
So, with more ardour than an unripe girl 
Left one day mistress of her mother's stores, 
He went about his hospitable task. 
My eyes were busy, and my thoughts no less, 
And pleased I looked upon my grey-haired Friend, 
As if to thank him ; he returned that look, 
Cheered, plainly, and yet serious. What a wreck 
Had we about us ! scattered was the floor, 
And, in like sort, chair, window-seat, and shelf, 
With books, maps, fossils, withered plants and 
flowers, 
And tufts of mountain moss. Mechanic tools 
Lay intermixed with scraps of paper, some 
Scribbled with verse : a broken angling-rod 
And shattered telescope, together linked 
By cobwebs, stood within a dusty nook ; 
And instruments of music, some half-made, 
Some in disgrace, hung dangling from the walls. 
But speedily the promise was fulfilled ; 
A feast before us, and a courteous Host 
Inviting us in glee to sit and eat. 
A napkin, white as foam of that rough brook 
By which it had been bleached, o'erspread the 
board ; 
And was itself half-covered with a store 
Of dainties, — oaten bread, curd, cheese, and cream ; 
And cakes of butter curiously embossed, 
Butter that had imbibed from meadow-flowers 
A golden hue, delicate as their own 
Faintly reflected in a lingering stream. 
Nor lacked, for more delight on that warm day, 
Our table, small parade of garden fruits, 
And whortle-berries from the mountain side. 
The Child, who long ere this had stilled his sobs. 
Was now a help to his late comforter, 
And moved, a willing Page, as he was bid, 
Ministering to our need. 
In genial mood, 
While at our pastoral banquet thus we sate 

THE SOLITARY. 

 

Fronting the window of that little cell, 
I could not, ever and anon, forbear 
To glance an upward look on two huge Peaks, 
That from some other vale peered into this. 
" Those lusty twins," exclaimed our host, " if here 
It were your lot to dwell, would soon become 
Your prized companions. — Many are the notes 
Which, in his tuneful course, the wind draws forth 
From rocks, woods, caverns, heaths, and dashing 
shores ; 
And well those lofty brethren bear their part 
In the wild concert — chiefly when the storm 
Rides high ; then aU the upper air they fill 
With roaring sound, that ceases not to flow, 
Like smoke, along the level of the blast, 
In mighty current ; theirs, too, is the song 
Of stream and headlong flood that seldom fails ; 
And, in the grim and breathless hour of noon, 
Methinks that I have heard them echo back 
The thunder's greeting. Nor have nature's laws 
Left them ungifted with a power to yield 
Music of finer tone ; a harmony, 
So do I call it, though it be the hand 
Of silence, though there be no voice ;— the clouds, 
The mist, the shadows, light of golden suns, 
Motions of moonlight, all come thither — touch, 
And have an answer — thither come, and shape 
A language not unwelcome to sick hearts 
And idle spirits : — there the sun himself, 
At the calm close of summer's longest day, 
Rests his substantial orb ; — between those heights 
And on the top of either pinnacle, 
More keenly than elsewhere in night's blue vault, 
Sparkle the stars, as of their station proud. 
Thoughts are not busier in the mind of man 
Than the mute agents stirring there : — alone 
Here do I sit and watch. — " 
A fall of voice, 
Regretted like the nightingale's last note, 
Had scarcely closed this high-wrought strain of 
rapture 
Ere with inviting smile the Wanderer said : 
" Now for the tale with which you threatened us ! " 
" In truth the threat escaped me unawares : 
Should the tale tire you, let this challenge stand 
For my excuse. Dissevered from mankind, 
As to your eyes and thoughts we must have seemed 
When ye looked down upon us from the crag, 
■ Islanders mid a stormy mountain sea, 
i We are not so ; — perpetually we touch 
Upon the vulgar ordinances of the world ; 
And he, whom this our cottage hath to-day 
Relinquished, lived dependent for his bread 
Upon the laws of public charity. 

The Housewife, tempted by such slender gains 
As might from that occasion be distilled, 
Opened, as she before had done for me, 
Her doors to admit this homeless Pensioner ; 
The portion gave of coarse but wholesome fare 
Which appetite required — a blind dull nook, 
Such as she had, the kennel of his rest ! 
This, in itself not ill, would yet have been 
 borne in earlier fife ; but his was now 
The still contentedness of seventy years. 
Calm did he sit under the wide-spread tree 
Of his old age ; and yet less calm and meek, 
Winningly meek or venerably calm, 
Than slow and torpid ; paying in this wise 
A penalty, if penalty it were, 
For spendthrift feats, excesses of his prime. 
I loved the old Man, for I pitied him ! 
A task it was, I own, to hold discourse 
With one so slow in gathering up his thoughts, 
But he was a cheap pleasure to my eyes ; 
Mild, inoffensive, ready in his way, 
And helpful to his utmost power : and there 
Our housewife knew full well what she possessed ! 
He was her vassal of all labour, tilled 
Her garden, from the pasture fetched her kiue ; 
And, one among the orderly array 
Of hay-makers, beneath the burning sun 
Maintained his place ; or needfully pursued 
His course, on errands bound, to other vales, 
Leading sometimes an inexperienced child 
Too young for any profitable task. 
So moved he like a shadow that performed 
Substantial service. Mark me now, and learn 
For what reward ! — The moon her monthly round 
Hath not completed since our dame, the queen 
Of this one cottage and this lonely dale, 
Into my little sanctuary rushed — 
Voice to a rueful treble humanized, 
And features in deplorable dismay. 
I treat the matter lightly, but, alas ! 
It is most serious : persevering rain 
Had fallen in torrents; all the mountain tops 
Were hidden, and black vapours coursed their sides; 
This had I seen, and saw ; but, till she spake, 
Was wholly ignorant that my ancient Friend — 
Who at her bidding, early and alone, 
Had clomb aloft to delve the moorland turf 
For winter fuel — to his noontide meal 
Returned not, and now, haply, on the heights 
Lay at the mercy of this raging storm. 
' Inhuman !' — said I, ' was an old Man's life 
Not worth the trouble of a thought ? — alas ! 
This notice comes too late.' With joy I saw 
Her husband enter— from a distant vale. 
N N 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

"We sallied forth together ; found the tools 
Which the neglected veteran had dropped, 
But through aU quarters looked for him in vain. 
We shouted — hut no answer ! Darkness fell 
Without remission of the blast or shower, 
And fears for our own safety drove us home. 
I, who weep little, did, I will confess, 
The moment I was seated here alone, 
Honour my little cell with some few tears 
Which anger and resentment could not dry. 
All night the storm endured ; and, soon as help 
Had been collected from the neighbouring vale, 
With morning we renewed our quest : the wind 
Was fallen, the rain abated, but the hills 
Lay shrouded in impenetrable mist ; 
And long and hopelessly we sought in vain : 
'Till, chancing on that lofty ridge to pass 
A heap of ruin — almost without walls 
And wholly without roof (the bleached remains 
Of a small chapel, where, in ancient time, 
The peasants of these lonely valleys used 
To meet for worship on that central height) — 
We there espied the object of our search, 
Lying full three parts buried among tufts 
Of heath-plant, under and above him strewn, 
To baffle, as he might, the watery storm : 
And there we found him breathing peaceably, 
Snug as a child that hides itself in sport 
'Mid a green hay-cock in a sunny field. 
We spake — he made reply, but would not stir 
At our entreaty ; less from want of power 
Than apprehension and bewildering thoughts. 
So was he lifted gently from the ground, 
And with their freight homeward the shepherds 
moved 
Through the dull mist, I following — when a step, 
A single step, that freed me from the skirts 
Of the blind vapour, opened to my view 
Glory beyond all glory ever seen 
By waking sense or by the dreaming soul ! 
The appearance, instantaneously disclosed, 
Was of a mighty city — boldly say 
A wilderness of building, sinking far 
And self-withdrawn into a boundless depth, 
Far sinking into splendor — without end ! 
Fabric it seemed of diamond and of gold, 
With alabaster domes, and silver spires, 
And blazing terrace upon terrace, high 
Uplifted ; here, serene pavilions bright, 
In avenues disposed ; there, towers begirt 
With battlements that on their restless fronts 
Bore stars — illumination of all gems ! 


By earthly nature had the effect been wrought 
Upon the dark materials of the storm 
Now pacified ; on them, and on the coves 
And mountain-steeps and summits, whereunto 
The vapours had receded, taking there 
Their station under a cerulean sky. 
Oh, 'twas an unimaginable sight ! 
Clouds, mists, streams, watery rocks and emerald 
turf, 
Clouds of all tincture, rocks and sapphire sky, 
Confused, commingled, mutually inflamed, 
Molten together, and composing thus, 
Each lost in each, that marvellous array 
Of temple, palace, citadel, and huge 
Fantastic pomp of structure without name, 
In fleecy folds voluminous, enwrapped. 
Right in the midst, where interspace appeared 
Of open court, an object like a throne 
Under a shining canopy of state 
Stood fixed ; and fixed resemblances were seen 
To implements of ordinary use, 
But vast in size, in substance glorified ; 
Such as by Hebrew Prophets were beheld 
In vision — forms uncouth of mightiest power 
For admiration and mysterious awe. 
This little Vale, a dwelling-place of Man, 
Lay low beneath my feet ; 'twas visible — 
I saw not, but I felt that it was there. 
That which I saw was the revealed abode 
Of Spirits in beatitude : my heart 
Swelled in my breast. — 'I have been dead,  
cried, 
' And now I live ! Oh ! wherefore do I live ?' 
And with that pang I prayed to be no more ! — 
— But I forget our Charge, as utterly 
I then forgot him : — there I stood and gazed : 
The apparition faded not away, 
And I descended. 
Having reached the house, 
I found its rescued inmate safely lodged, 
And in serene possession of himself, 
Beside a fire whose genial warmth seemed met 
By a faint shining from the heart, a gleam 
Of comfort, spread over his pallid face. 
Great show of joy the housewife made, and truly 
Was glad to find her conscience set at ease ; 
And not less glad, for sake of her good name, 
That the poor Sufferer had escaped with life. 
But, though he seemed at first to have received 
No harm, and uncomplaining as before 
Went through his usual tasks, a silent change 
Soon showed itself r. he lingered three short 
weeks ; 
And from the cottage hath been borne to-day. 



DESPONDENCY. 

 

So ends -my dolorous tale, and glad I am 
That it is ended." At these words he turned — ■ 
And, with blithe air of open fellowship, 
Brought from the cupboard wine and stouter cheer, 
Like one who would be merry. Seeing this, 

My grey-haired Friend said courteously — " Nay, 
nay, 
You have regaled us as a hermit ought ; 
Now let us forth into the sun ! " — Our Host 
Rose, though reluctantly, and forth we went. 


BOOK THIRD. 

DESPONDENCY. 

ARGUMENT. 
Images in the Valley — Another Recess in it entered and 
described. — Wanderer's sensations.— Solitary's excited 
by the same objects.— Contrast between these.— Despon- 
dency of the Solitary gently reproved.— Conversation 
exhibiting the Solitary's past and present opinions 
and feelings, till he enters upon his own History at 
length.— His domestic felicity— Afflictions.— Dejection. 
—Roused by the French Revolution — Disappointment 
and disgust.— Voyage to America.— Disappointment 
and disgust pursue him. — His return. — His languor 
and depression of mind, from want of faith in the 
great truths of Religion, and want of confidence in the 
virtue of Mankind. 
; A humming bee — a little tinkling rill — 
A pah of falcons wheeling on the wing, 
i In clamorous agitation, round the crest 
| Of a tall rock, their airy citadel — 
By each and all of these the pensive ear 
I Was greeted, in the silence that ensued, 
j When through the cottage-threshold we had passed, 
And, deep within that lonesome valley, stood 
' Once more beneath the concave of a blue 
And cloudless sky. — Anon exclaimed our Host, 
Triumphantly dispersing with the taunt 
The shade of discontent which on his brow 
! Had gathered, — " Ye have left my cell, — but see 
! How Nature hems you in with friendly arms ! 
i And by her help ye are my prisoners still. 
iBut which way shall I lead you ? — how contrive, 
(In spot so parsimoniously endowed, 
'That the brief hours, which yet remain, may reap 
Some recompense of knowledge or delight? " 
So saying, round he looked, as if perplexed ; 
And, to remove those doubts, my grey-haired 
Friend 
iSaid — "Shall we take this pathway for our guide \ — 
ilUpward it winds, as if, in summer heats, 
jfts line had first been fashioned by the flock 
Seeking a place of refuge at the root 
pf yon black Yew-tree, whose protruded boughs 
Darken the silver bosom of the crag. 

From which she draws her meagre sustenance. 
There in commodious shelter may we rest. 
Or let us trace this streamlet to its source • 
Feebly it tinkles with an earthy sound, 
And a few steps may bring us to the spot [herbs, 
Where, haply, crowned with flowerets and green 
The mountain infant to the sun comes forth, 
Like human life from darkness." — A quick turn 
Through a strait passage of encumbered ground, 
Proved that such hope was vain : — for now we stood 
Shut out from prospect of the open vale, 
And saw the water, that composed this rill, 
Descending, disembodied, and diffused 
O'er the smooth surface of an ample crag, 
Lofty, and steep, and naked as a tower. 
All further progress here was barred ; — And who, 
Thought I, if master of a vacant hour, 
Here would not linger, willingly detained ? 
Whether to such wild objects he were led 
When copious rains have magnified the stream 
Into a loud and white-robed waterfall, 
Or introduced at this more quiet time. 
Upon a semicirque of turf-clad ground, 
The hidden nook discovered to our view 
A mass of rock, resembling, as it lay 
Right at the foot of that moist precipice, 
A stranded ship, with keel upturned, that rests 
Fearless of winds and waves. Three several stones 
Stood near, of smaller size, and not unlike 
To monumental pillars : and, from these 
Some little space disjoined, a pair were seen, 
That with united shoulders bore aloft 
A fragment, like an altar, flat and smooth : 
Barren the tablet, yet thereon appeared 
A tall and shining holly, that had found 
A hospitable chink, and stood upright, 
As if inserted by some human hand 
In mockery, to wither in the sun, 
Or lay its beauty flat before a breeze, 
The first that entered. But no breeze did now 
Find entrance • — high or low appeared no trace 
N N  

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Of motion, save the water that descended, 
Diffused adown that barrier of steep rock, 
And softly creeping, like a breath of air, 
Such as is sometimes seen, and hardly seen, 
To brush the still breast of a crystal lake. 
" Behold a cabinet for sages built, 
Which kings might envy ! " — Praise to this effect 
Broke from the happy old Man's reverend lip ; 
Who to the Solitary turned, and said, 
" In sooth, with love's familiar privilege, 
You have decried the wealth which is your own. 
Among these rocks and stones, methinks, I see 
More than the heedless impress that belongs 
To lonely nature's casual work : they bear 
A semblance strange of power intelligent, 
And of design not wholly worn away. 
Boldest of plants that ever faced the wind, 
How gracefully that slender shrub looks forth 
From its fantastic birth-place ! And I own, 
Some shadowy intimations haunt me here, 
That in these shows a chronicle survives 
Of purposes aldn to those of Man, 
But wrought with mightier arm than now prevails. 
— Voiceless the stream descends into the gulf 
With timid lapse ; — and lo ! while in this strait 
I stand— the chasm of sky above my head 
Is heaven's profoundest azure ; no domain 
For fickle, short-lived clouds to occupy, 
Or to pass through ; but rather an abyss 
In which the everlasting stars abide ; 
And whose soft gloom, and boundless depth, might 
tempt 
The curious eye to look for them by day. 
—Hail Contemplation ! from the stately towers, 
Reared by the industrious hand of human art 
To lift thee high above the misty air 
And turbulence of murmuring cities vast ; 
From academic groves, that have for thee 
Been planted, hither come and find a lodge 
To which thou mayst resort for holier peace, — 
From whose calm centre thou, through height or 
depth, 
Mayst penetrate, wherever truth shall lead ; 
Measuring through all degrees, until the scale 
Of time and conscious nature disappear, 
Lost in unsearchable eternity ! " 
A pause ensued ; and with minuter care 
We scanned the various features of the scene : 
And soon the Tenant of that lonely vale 
With courteous voice thus spake — 
" I should have grieved 
Hereafter, not escaping self-reproach, 

If from my poor retirement ye had gone 
Leaving this nook unvisited : but, in sooth, 
Your unexpected presence had so roused 
My spirits, that they were bent on enterprise; 
And, like an ardent hunter, I forgot, 
Or, shall I say ? — disdained, the game that lurks 
At my own door. The shapes before our eyes 
And their arrangement, doubtless must be deemed 
The sport of Nature, aided by blind Chance 
Rudely to mock the works of toiling Man. 
And hence, this upright shaft of unhewn stone, 
From Fancy, willing to set off her stores 
By sounding titles, hath acquired the name 
Of Pompey's pillar ; that I gravely style 
My Theban obelisk ; and, there, behold 
A Druid cromlech ! — thus I entertain 
The antiquarian humour, and am pleased 
To skim along the surfaces of things, 
Beguiling harmlessly the listless hours. 
But if the spirit be oppressed by sense 
Of instability, revolt, decay, 
And change, and emptiness, these freaks of Nature 
And her blind helper Chance, do then suffice 
To quicken, and to aggravate — to feed 
Pity and scorn, and melancholy pride, 
Not less than that huge Pile (from some abyss 
Of mortal power unquestionably sprung) 
Whose hoary diadem of pendent rocks 
Confines the shrill-voiced whirlwind, round and 
round 
Eddying within its vast circumference, 
On Sarum's naked plain — than pyramid 
Of Egypt, unsubverted, undissolved — 
Or Syria's marble ruins towering high 
Above the sandy desert, in the light 
Of sun or moon.— Forgive me, if I say 
That an appearance which hath raised your minds 
To an exalted pitch (the self-same cause 
Different effect producing) is for me 
Fraught rather with depression than delight, 
Though shame it were, could I not look around, 
By the reflection of your pleasure, pleased. 
Yet happier in my judgment, even than you 
With your bright transports fairly may be deemed, 
The wandering Herbalist, — who, clear alike 
From vain, and, that worse evil, vexing thoughts, 
Casts, if he ever chance to enter here, 
Upon these uncouth Forms a slight regard 
Of transitory interest, and peeps round 
For some rare floweret of the hills, or plant 
Of craggy fountain ; what he hopes for wins, 
Or learns, at least, that 'tis not to be won : 
Then, keen and eager, as a fine-nosed hound 
By soul-engrossing instinct driven along 


Through wood or open field, the harmless Man 
Departs, intent upon his onward quest ! — 
Nor is that Fellow- wanderer, so deem I, 
Less to be envied, (you may trace him oft 
By scars which his activity has left 
Beside our roads and pathways, though, thank 
Heaven ! 
This covert nook reports not of his hand) • 
He who with pocket-hammer smites the edge 
,Of luckless rock or prominent stone, disguised 
In weather-stains or crusted o'er by Nature 
With her first growths, detaching by the stroke 
A chip or splinter — to resolve his doubts ; 
And, with that ready answer satisfied, 
The substance classes by some barbarous name, 
And hurries on ; or from the fragments picks 
His specimen, if but haply interveined 
With sparkling mineral, or should crystal cube 
Lurk in its cells — and thinks himself enriched, 
Wealthier, and doubtless wiser, than before ! 
Intrusted safely each to his pursuit, 
.Earnest alike, let both from hill to hill 
iRange ; if it please them, speed from clime to clime ; 
The mindis full — andfree from pain their pastime." 
| "Then," said I, interposing, "One is near, 
Who cannot but possess in your esteem 
Place worthier still of envy. May I name, 
Without offence, that fair-faced cottage-boy ? 
Dame Nature's pupil of the lowest form, 
j Youngest apprentice in the school of art ! 
Him, as we entered from the open glen, 
ijYou might have noticed, busily engaged, 
Heart, soul, and hands, — in mending the defects 
'Left in the fabric of a leaky dam 
Raised for enabling this penurious stream 
To turn a slender mill (that new-made plaything) 
For his delight — the happiest he of all !" 
"Far happiest," answered the desponding Man, 
'If, such as now he is, he might remain ! 
Ah ! what avails imagination high. 
Dr question deep ? what profits all that earth, 
Or heaven's blue vault, is suffered to put forth 
)f impulse or allurement, for the Soul 
Po quit the beaten track of life, and soar 
par as she finds a yielding element 
n past or future ; far as she can go 
|fhrough time or space — if neither in the one, 
Nor in the other region, nor in aught 
j?hat Fancy, dreaming o'er the map of things, 
lath placed beyond these penetrable bounds, 
Words of assurance can be heard ; if nowhere 
j^. habitation, for consummate good, 

DESPONDENCY. 

 

Or for progressive virtue, by the search 
Can be attained, — a better sanctuary 
From doubt and sorrow, than the senseless grave ? " 
" Is this," the grey-haired Wanderer mildly said, 
" The voice, which we so lately overheard, 
To that same child, addressing tenderly 
The consolations of a hopeful mind % 
' His tody is at rest, Ms soul in Jieavcn.' 
These were your words ; and, verily, methinks 
Wisdom is oft-times nearer when we stoop 
Than when we soar." — 
The Other, not displeased, 
Promptly replied — " My notion is the same. 
And I, without reluctance, could decline 
All act of inquisition whence we rise, 
And what, when breath hath ceased, we may be- 
come. 
Here are we, in a bright and breathing world. 
Our origin, what matters it ? In lack 
Of worthier explanation, say at once 
With the American (a thought which suits 
The place where now we stand) that certain men 
Leapt out together from a rocky cave ; 
And these were the first parents of mankind : 
Or, if a different image be recalled 
By the warm sunshine, and the jocund voice 
Of insects chirping out their careless lives 
On these soft beds of thyme-besprinkled turf, 
Choose, with the gay Athenian, a conceit 
As sound — blithe race ! whose mantles were be- 
decked 
With golden grasshoppers, in sign that they 
Had sprung, like those bright creatures, from the 
soil 
Whereon their endless generations dwelt. 
But stop ! — these theoretic fancies jar 
On serious minds : then, as the Hindoos draw 
Their holy Ganges from a skiey fount, 
Even so deduce the stream of human life 
From seats of power divine ; and hope, or trust, 
That our existence winds her stately course 
Beneath the sun, like Ganges, to make part 
Of a living ocean ; or, to sink engulfed, 
Like Niger, in impenetrable sands 
And utter darkness : thought which may be faced, 
Though comfortless ! — 
Not of myself I speak ; 
Such acquiescence neither doth imply, 
In me, a meekly- bending spirit soothed 
By natural piety ; nor a lofty mind, 
By philosophic discipline prepared 
For calm subjection to acknowledged law ; 
Pleased to have been, contented not to be. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Such palms I boast not ; — no ! to me, who find, 
Reviewing my past way, much to condemn, 
Little to praise, and nothing to regret, 
(Save some remembrances of dream-like joys 
That scarcely seem to have belonged to me) 
If I must take my choice between the pair 
That rule alternately the weary hours, 
Night is than day more acceptable ; sleep 
Doth, in my estimate of good, appear 
A better state than waking ; death than sleep : 
Feelingly sweet is stillness after storm, 
Though under covert of the wormy ground ! 
Yet be it said, in justice to myself, 
That in more genial times, when I was free 
To explore the destiny of human kind 
(Not as an intellectual game pursued 
With curious subtilty, from wish to cheat 
Irksome sensations ; but by love of truth 
Urged on, or haply by intense delight 
In feeding thought, wherever thought could feed) 
I did not rank with those (too dull or nice, 
For to my judgment such they then appeared, 
Or too aspiring, thankless at the best) 
Who, in this frame of human life, perceive 
An object whereunto their souls are tied 
In discontented wedlock ; nor did e'er, 
From me, those dark impervious shades, that hang 
Upon the region whither we are bound, 
Exclude a power to enjoy the vital beams 
Of present sunshine. — Deities that float 
On wings, angelic Spirits ! I could muse 
O'er what from eldest time we have been told 
Of your bright forms and glorious faculties, 
And with the imagination rest content, 
Not wishing more ; repining not to tread 
The little sinuous path of earthly care, 
By flowers embellished, and by springs refreshed. 
— 'Blow winds of autumn ! — let your chilling breath 
' Take the live herbage from the mead, and strip 
' The shady forest of its green attire, — 
' And let the bursting clouds to fury rouse 
' The gentle brooks ! — Your desolating sway, 
' Sheds,' I exclaimed, ' no sadness upon me, 
' And no disorder in your rage I find. 
' What dignity, what beauty, in this change 
' From mild to angry, and from sad to gay, 
' Alternate and revolving ! How benign, 
' How rich in animation and delight, 
' How bountiful these elements — compared 
' With aught, as more desirable and fair, 
' Devised by fancy for the golden age ; 
' Or the perpetual warbling that prevails 
< In Arcady, beneath unaltered skies, 

' Through the long year in constant quiet bound, 
' Night hushed as night, and day serene as day ! ' 
— But why this tedious record ? — Age, we know, 
Is garrulous ; and solitude is apt 
To anticipate the privilege of Age. 
From far ye come ; and surely with a hope 
Of better entertainment : — let us hence ! " 
Loth to forsake the spot, and still more loth 
To be diverted from our present theme, 
I said, " My thoughts, agreeing, Sir, with yours, 
Would push this censure farther ; — for, if smiles 
Of scornful pity be the just reward 
Of Poesy thus courteously employed 
In framing models to improve the scheme 
Of Man's existence, and recast the world, 
Why should not grave Philosophy be styled, 
Herself, a dreamer of a kindred stock, 
A dreamer yet more spiritless and dull ? 
Yes, shall the fine immunities she boasts 
Establish sounder titles of esteem 
For her, who (all too timid and reserved 
For onset, for resistance too inert, 
Too weak for suffering, and for hope too tame) 
Placed, among flowery gardens curtained round 
With world-excluding groves, the brotherhood 
Of soft Epicureans, taught — if they 
The ends of being would secure, and win 
The crown of wisdom — to yield up their souls 
To a voluptuous unconcern, preferring 
Tranquillity to all things. Or is she," 
I cried, " more worthy of regard, the Power, 
Who, for the sake of sterner quiet, closed 
The Stoic's heart against the vain approach 
Of admiration, and all sense of joy ?" 
His countenance gave notice that my zeal 
Accorded little with his present mind ; 
I ceased, and he resumed. — " Ah ! gentle Sir, 
Slight, if you will, the means; but spare to slight 
The end of those, who did, by system, rank, 
As the prime object of a wise man's aim, 
Security from shock of accident, 
Release from fear ; and cherished peaceful days 
For their own sakes, as mortal life's chief good, 
And only reasonable felicity. 
What motive drew, what impulse, I would ask, 
Through a long course of later ages, drove, 
The hermit to his cell in forest wide ; 
Or what detained him, till his closing eyes 
Took their last farewell of the sun and stars, 
Fast anchored in the desert ? — Not alone 
Dread of the persecuting sword, remorse, 
Wrongs unredressed, or insults unavenged 

DESPONDENCY. 

 

And unavengeable, defeated pride, 
i Prosperity subverted, maddening want, 
Friendship betrayed, affection unreturned, 
Love with despair, or grief in agony ; — 
Not always from intolerable pangs 
He fled ; but, compassed round by pleasure, sighed 
For independent happiness ; craving peace, 
The central feeling of all happiness, 
Not as a refuge from distress or pain, 
. A breathing-time, vacation, or a truce, 
But for its absolute self ; a life of peace, 
Stability without regret or fear ; 
That hath been, is, and shall be evermore ! — 
Such the reward he sought ; and wore out life, 
There, where on few external things his heart 
Was set, and those his own ; or, if not his, 
Subsisting under nature's stedfast law. 
What other yearning was the master tie 
Of the monastic brotherhood, upon rock 
Atrial, or in green secluded vale, 
One after one, collected from afar, 
An undissolving fellowship ? — What but this, 
The universal instinct of repose, 
The longing for confirmed tranquillity, 
Inward and outward; humble, yet sublime : 
The life where hope and memory are as one ; 
Where earth is quiet and her face, unchanged 
Save by the simplest toil of human hands 
Or seasons' difference ; the immortal Soul 
Consistent in self-rule ; and heaven revealed 
To meditation in that quietness ! — 
Such was their scheme : and though the wished for 
end 
By multitudes was missed, perhaps attained 
By none, they for the attempt, and pains employed, 
Do, in my present censure, stand redeemed 
i From the unqualified disdain, that once 
Would have been cast upon them by my voice 
Delivering her decisions from the seat 
Of forward youth — that scruples not to solve 
Doubts, and determine questions, by the rules 
Of inexperienced judgment, ever prone 
To overweening faith ; and is inflamed, 
By courage, to demand from real life 
The test of act and suffering, to provoke 
Hostility — how dreadful when it comes, 
Whether affliction be the foe, or guilt ! 
i A child of earth, I rested, in that stage 
Of my past course to which these thoughts advert, 
Upon earth's native energies ; forgetting 
That mine was a condition which required 


Nor energy, nor fortitude — a calm 
Without vicissitude ; which, if the like 
Had been presented to my view elsewhere, 
I might have even been tempted to despise. 
But no — for the serene was also bright ; 
Enlivened happiness with joy o'erfl owing, 
With joy, and — oh ! that memory should survive 
To speak the word — with rapture ! Nature's boon, 
Life's genuine inspiration, happiness 
Above what rules can teach, or fancy feign; 
Abused, as all possessions are abused 
That are not prized according to their worth. 
And yet, what worth ? what good is given to men, 
More solid than the gilded clouds of heaven ? 
What joy more lasting than a vernal flower I — 
None ! 'tis the general plaint of human kind 
In solitude : and mutually addressed 
From each to all, for wisdom's sake : — This truth 
The priest announces from his holy seat : 
And, crowned with garlands in the summer grove, 
The poet fits it to his pensive lyre. 
Yet, ere that final resting-place be gained, 
Sharp contradictions may arise, by doom 
Of this same life, compelling us to grieve 
That the prosperities of love and joy 
Should be permitted, oft-times, to endure 
So long, and be at once cast down for ever. 
Oh ! tremble, ye, to whom hath been assigned 
A course of days composing happy months, 
And they as happy years ; the present still 
So like the past, and both so firm a pledge 
Of a congenial future, that the wheels 
Of pleasure move without the aid of hope : 
For Mutability is Nature's bane ; 
And slighted Hope will be avenged ; and, when 
Ye need her favours, ye shall find her not; 
But in her stead — fear — doubt — and agony !" 
This was the bitter language of the heart : 
But, while he spake, look, gesture, tone of voice, 
Though discomposed and vehement, were such 
As skill and graceful nature might suggest 
To a proficient of the tragic scene 
Standing before the multitude, beset 
With dark events. Desirous to divert 
Or stem the current of the speaker's thoughts, 
We signified a wish to leave that place 
Of stillness and ciose privacy, a nook 
That seemed for self-examination made ; 
Or, for confession, in the sinner's need, 
Hidden from all men's view. To our attempt 
He yielded not; but, pointing to a slope 
Of mossy turf defended from the sun, 
And on that couch inviting us to rest, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Full on that tender-hearted Man he turned 
A serious eye, and his speech thus renewed. 
" You never saw, your eyes did never look 
On the bright form of Her whom once I loved : — 
Her silver voice was heard upon the earth, 
A sound unknown to you ; else, honoured Friend ! 
Your heart had borne a pitiable share 
Of what I suffered, when I wept that loss, 
And suffer now, not seldom, from the thought 
That I remember, and can weep no more. — ■ 
Stripped as I am of all the golden fruit 
Of self-esteem ; and by the cutting blasts 
Of self-reproach familiarly assailed ; 
Yet would I not be of such wintry bareness 
But that some leaf of your regard should hang 
Upon my naked branches : — lively thoughts 
Give birth, full often, to unguarded words ; 
I grieve that, in your presence, from my tongue 
Too much of frailty hath already dropped ; 
But that too much demands still more. 
You know, 
Revered Compatriot — and to you, kind Sir, 
(Not to be deemed a stranger, as you come 
Following the guidance of these welcome feet 
To our secluded vale) it may be told — 
That my demerits did not sue in vain 
To One on whose mild radiance many gazed 
With hope, and all with pleasure. This fair 
Bride— 
In the devotedness of youthful love, 
Preferring me to parents, and the choir 
Of gay companions, to the natal roof, 
And all known places and familiar sights 
(Resigned with sadness gently weighing down 
Her trembling expectations, but no more 
Than did to her due honour, and to me 
Yielded, that day, a confidence sublime 
In what I had to build upon) — this Bride, 
Young, modest, meek, and beautiful, I led 
To a low cottage in a sunny bay, 
Where the salt sea innocuously breaks, 
And the sea breeze as innocently breathes, 
On Devon's leafy shores ; — a sheltered hold, 
In a soft clime encouraging the soil 
To a luxuriant bounty ! — As our steps 
Approach the embowered abode — our chosen seat — 
See, rooted in the earth, her kindly bed, 
The unendangered myrtle, decked with flowers, 
Before the threshold stands to welcome us ! 
While, in the flowering myrtle's neighbourhood, 
Not overlooked but courting no regard, 
Those native plants, the holly and the yew, 
Gave modest intimation to the mind 

How willingly their aid they would unite 
With the green myrtle, to endear the hours 
Of winter, and protect that pleasant place. 
— Wild were the walks upon those lonely Downs, 
Track leading into track ; how marked, how worn 
Into bright verdure, between fern and gorse, 
Winding away its never ending line 
On their smooth surface, evidence was none : 
But, there, lay open to our daily haunt, 
A range of unappropriated earth, 
Where youth's ambitious feet might move at large; 
Whence, unmolested wanderers, we beheld 
The shining giver of the day diffuse 
His brightness o'er a tract of sea and land 
Gay as our spirits, free as our desires ; 
As our enjoyments, boundless. — From those heights 
We dropped, at pleasure, into sylvan combs ; 
Where arbours of impenetrable shade, 
And mossy seats, detained us side by side, 
With hearts at ease, and knowledge in our hearts 
' That all the grove and all the day was ours.' 
happy time ! still happier was at hand ; 
For Nature called my Partner to resign 
Her share in the pure freedom of that life, 
Enjoyed by us in common. — To my hope, 
To my heart's wish, my tender Mate became 
The thankful captive of maternal bonds ; 
And those wild paths were left to me alone. 
There could I meditate on follies past ; 
And, like a weary voyager escaped 
From risk and hardship, inwardly retrace 
A course of vain delights and thoughtless guilt, 
And self-indulgence — without shame pursued. 
There, undisturbed, could think of and could thank 
Her whose submissive spirit was to me 
Rule and restraint — my guardian — shall I say 
That earthly Providence, whose guiding love 
Within a port of rest had lodged me safe ; 
Safe from temptation, and from danger far ? 
Strains followed of acknowledgment addressed 
To an Authority enthroned above 
The reach of sight; from whom, as from their 
source, 
Proceed all visible ministers of good 
That walk the earth — Father of heaven and earth, 
Father, and king, and judge, adored and feared ! 
These acts of mind, and memory, and heart, 
And spirit — interrupted and relieved 
By observations transient as the glance 
Of flying sunbeams, or to the outward form 
Cleaving with power inherent and intense, 
As the mute insect fixed upon the plant 
On whose soft leaves it hangs, and from whose cup 

DESPONDENCY. 

 

It draws its nourishment imperceptibly — 
Endeared my wanderings ; and the mother's kiss 
And infant's smile awaited my return. 
In privacy we dwelt, a wedded pair, 
Companions daily, often all day long ; 
Not placed by fortune within easy reach 
Of various intercourse, nor wishing aught 
Beyond the allowance of our own fire-side, 
The twain within our happy cottage born, 
Inmates, and heirs of our united love ; 
Graced mutually by difference of sex, 
And with no wider interval of time 
Between their several births than served for one 
To establish something of a leader's sway ; 
Yet left them joined by sympathy in age ; 
Equals in pleasure, fellows in pursuit. 
On these two pillars rested as in air 
Our solitude. 
It soothes me to perceive, 
Your courtesy withholds not from my words 
Attentive audience. But, oh ! gentle Friends, 
As times of quiet and unbroken peace, 
Though, for a nation, times of blessedness, 
Give back faint echoes from the historian's page ; 
So, in the imperfect sounds of this discourse, 
Depressed I hear, how faithless is the voice 
Which those most blissful days reverberate. 
What special record can, Or need, be given 
To rules and habits, whereby much was done, 
But all within the sphere of little things ; 
Of humble, though, to us, important cares, 
And precious interests ? Smoothly did our life 
Advance, swerving not from the path prescribed ; 
Her annual, her diurnal, round alike 
Maintained with faithful care. And you divine 
The worst effects that our condition saw 
If you imagine changes slowly wrought, 
And in their progress unperceivable ; 
Not wished for ; sometimes noticed with a sigh, 
(Whate'er of good or lovely they might bring) 
Sighs of regret, for the familiar good 
And loveliness endeared which they removed. 
Seven years of occupation undisturbed 
: Established seemingly a right to hold 
> That happiness ; and use and habit gave 
To what an alien spirit had acquired 
i A patrimonial sanctity. And thus, 
: With thoughts and wishes bounded to this world, 
]i I lived and breathed ; most grateful — if to enjoy 
; Without repining or desire for more, 
For different lot, or change to higher sphere, 
(Only except some impulses of pride 


With no determined object, though upheld 
By theories with suitable support) — 
Most grateful, if in such wise to enjoy 
Be proof of gratitude for what we have ; 
Else, I allow, most thankless. — But, at once, 
From some dark seat of fatal power was urged 
A claim that shattered all. — Our blooming girl, 
Caught in the gripe of death, with such brief time 
To struggle in as scarcely would allow 
Her cheek to change its colour, was conveyed 
From us to inaccessible worlds, to regions 
Where height, or depth, admits not the approach 
Of living man, though longing to pursue. 
— With even as brief a warning — and how soon, 
With what short interval of time between, 
I tremble yet to think of — our last prop, 
Our happy life's only remaining stay — 
The brother followed ; and was seen no more ! 
Calm as a frozen lake when ruthless winds 
Blow fiercely, agitating earth and sky, 
The Mother now remained ; as if in her, 
Who, to the lowest region of the soul, 
Had been erewhile unsettled and disturbed, 
This second visitation had no power 
To shake ; but only to bind up and seal ; 
And to establish thankfulness of heart 
In Heaven's determinations, ever just. 
The eminence whereon her spirit stood, 
Mine was unable to attain. Immense 
The space that severed us ! But, as the sight 
Communicates with heaven's ethereal orbs 
Incalculably distant ; so, I felt 
That consolation may descend from far 
(And that is intercourse, and union, too,) 
While, overcome with speechless gratitude, 
And, with a holier love inspired, I looked 
On her — at once superior to my woes 
And partner of my loss. — heavy change ! 
Dimness o'er this clear luminary crept 
Insensibly ; — the immortal and divine 
Yielded to mortal reflux ; her pure glory, 
As from the pinnacle of worldly state 
Wretched ambition drops astounded, fell 
Into a gulf obscure of silent grief, 
And keen heart-anguish— of itself ashamed, 
Yet obstinately cherishing itself: 
And, so consumed, she melted from my arms ; 
And left me, on this earth, disconsolate ! 
What followed cannot be reviewed in thought ; 
Much less, retraced in words. If she, of life 
Blameless, so intimate with love and joy 
And all the tender motions of the soul, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Had been supplanted, could I hope to stand — 
Infirm, dependent, and now destitute ? 
I called on dreams and visions, to disclose 
That which is veiled from waking thought ; 
conjured 
Eternity, as men constrain a ghost 
To appear and answer ; to the grave I spake 
Imploringly ; — looked up, and asked the Heavens 
If Angels traversed their cerulean floors, 
If fixed or wandering star could tidings yield 
Of the departed spirit — what abode 
It occupies — what consciousness retains 
Of former loves and interests. Then my soul 
Turned inward, — to examine of what stuff 
Time's fetters are composed ; and life was put 
To inquisition, long and profitless ! 
By pain of heart — now checked — and now impel- 
led— 
The intellectual power, through words and things, 
Went sounding on, a dim and perilous way ! 
And from those transports, and these toils abstruse, 
Some trace am I enabled to retain 
Of time, else lost ; — existing unto me 
Only by records in myself not found. 
From that abstraction I was rou?ed, — and how ? 
Even as a thoughtful shepherd by a flash 
Of lightning startled in a gloomy cave 
Of these wild hills. For, lo! the dread Bastile, 
With all the chambers in its horrid towers, 
Fell to the ground : — by violence overthrown 
Of indignation ; and with shouts that drowned 
The crash it made in falling ! From the wreck 
A golden palace rose, or seemed to rise, 
The appointed seat of equitable law 
And mild paternal sway. The potent shock 
I felt : the transformation I perceived, 
As marvellously seized as in that moment 
When, from the blind mist issuing, I beheld 
Glory — beyond aU glory ever seen, 
Confusion infinite of heaven and earth, 
Dazzling the soul. Meanwhile, prophetic harps 
In every grove were ringing, ' War shall cease ; 
' Did ye not hear that conquest is abjured ? 
' Bring garlands, bring forth choicest flowers, to 
deck 
< The tree of Liberty.' — My heart rebounded ; 
My melancholy voice the chorus joined ; 
— ' Be joyful all ye nations ; in all lands, 
' Ye that are capable of joy be glad ! 
' Henceforth, whate'er is wanting to yourselves 
' In others ye shall promptly find ; — and all, 
' Enriched by mutual and reflected wealth, 
' Shall with one heart honour their common kind.' 

Thus was I reconverted to the world ; 
Society became my glittering bride, 
And airy hopes my children. — From the depths 
Of natural passion, seemingly escaped, 
My soul diffused herself in wide embrace 
Of institutions, and the forms of things ; 
As they exist, in mutable array, 
Upon life's surface. What, though in my veins 
There flowed no Gallic blood, nor had I breathed 
The air of France, not less than Gallic zeal 
Kindled and burnt among the sapless twigs 
Of my exhausted heart. If busy men 
In sober conclave met, to weave a web 
Of amity, whose living threads should stretch 
Beyond the seas, and to the farthest pole, 
There did I sit, assisting. If, with noise 
And acclamation, crowds in open air 
Expressed the tumult of their minds, my voice 
There mingled, heard or not. The powers of song 
I left not uninvoked ; and, in still groves, 
Where mild enthusiasts tuned a pensive lay 
Of thanks and expectation, in accord 
With their belief, I sang Saturnian rule 
Returned, — a progeny of golden years 
Permitted to descend, and bless mankind. 
— With promises the Hebrew Scriptures teem : 
I felt their invitation ; and resumed 
A long-suspended office in the House 
Of public worship, where, the glowing phrase 
Of ancient inspiration serving me, 
I promised also, — with undaunted trust 
Foretold, and added prayer to prophecy ; 
The admiration winning of the crowd ; 
The help desiring of the pure devout. 
Scorn and contempt forbid me to proceed ! 
But History, time's slavish scribe, will tell 
How rapidly the zealots of the cause 
Disbanded — or in hostile ranks appeared ; 
Some, tired of honest service ; these, outdone, 
Disgusted therefore, or appalled, by aims 
Of fiercer zealots — so confusion reigned, 
And the more faithful were compelled to exclaim, 
As Brutus did to Virtue, ' Liberty, 
' I worshipped thee, and find thee but a Shade ! ' 
Such recantation had for me no charm, 
Nor would I bend to it ; who should have grieved 
At aught, however fair, that bore the mien 
Of a conclusion, or catastrophe. 
Why then conceal, that, when the simply good 
In timid selfishness withdrew, I sought 
Other support, not scrupulous whence it came ; 
And, by what compromise it stood, not nice ? 

DESPONDENCY. 

 

Enough if notions seemed to be high-pitched, 
And qualities determined. — Among men 
So charactered did I maintain a strife 
Hopeless, and still more hopeless every hour ; 
But, in the process, I began to feel 
That, if the emancipation of the world 
Were missed, I should at least secure my own, 
And be in part compensated. For rights, 
Widely — inveterately usurped upon, 
I spake with vehemence ; and promptly seized 
All that Abstraction furnished for my needs 
Or purposes ; nor scrupled to proclaim, 
And propagate, by hberty of life, 
Those new persuasions. Not that I rejoiced, 
Or even found pleasure, in such vagrant course, 
For its own sake ; but farthest from the walk 
Which I had trod in happiness and peace, 
Was most inviting to a troubled mind ; 
That, in a struggling and distempered world, 
Saw a seductive image of herself. 
Yet, mark the contradictions of which Man 
Is still the sport ! Here Nature was my guide, 
The Nature of the dissolute ; but thee, 
fostering Nature ! I rejected — smiled 
At others' tears in pity ; and in scorn 
At those, which thy soft influence sometimes drew 
From my unguarded heart. — The tranquil shores 
Of Britain circumscribed me ; else, perhaps 
 might have been entangled among deeds, 
Which, now, as infamous, I should abhor — 
Despise, as senseless : for my spirit relished 
Strangely the exasperation of that Land, 
Which turned an angry beak against the down 
Of her own breast ; confounded into hope 
Of disencumbering thus her fretful wings. 
But all was quieted by iron bonds 
Of military sway. The shifting aims, 
The moral interests, the creative might, 
The varied functions and high attributes 
Of civil action, yielded to a power 
Formal, and odious, and contemptible. 
— In Britain, ruled a panic dread of change ; 
The weak were praised, rewarded, and advanced ; 
And, from the impulse of a just disdain, 
Once more did I retire into myself. 
There feeling no contentment, I resolved 
To fly, for safeguard, to some foreign shore, 
, Remote from Europe ; from her blasted hopes ; 
Her fields of carnage, and polluted air. 
Fresh blew the wind, when o'er the Atlantic Main 
The ship went gliding with her thoughtless crew ; 
And who among them but an Exile, freed 

From discontent, indifferent, pleased to sit 
Among the busily-employed, not more 
With obligation charged, with service taxed, 
Than the loose pendant — to the idle wind 
Upon the tall mast streaming. But, ye Powers 
Of soul and sense mysteriously allied, 
, never let the Wretched, if a choice 
Be left him, trust the freight of his distress 
To a long voyage on the silent deep ! 
For, like a plague, will memory break out ; 
And, in the blank and solitude of things, 
Upon his spirit, with a fever's strength, 
Will conscience prey. — Feebly must they have felt 
Who, in old time, attired with snakes and whips 
The vengeful Furies. Beautiful regards 
Were turned on me — the face of her I loved ; 
The Wife and Mother pitifully fixing 
Tender reproaches, insupportable ! 
Where now that boasted liberty ? No welcome 
From unknown objects I received ; and those, 
Known and familiar, which the vaulted sky 
Did, in the placid clearness of the night, 
Disclose, had accusations to prefer 
Against my peace. Within the cabin stood 
That volume — as a compass for the soul — 
Revered among the nations. I implored 
Its guidance ; but the infallible support 
Of faith was wanting. Tell me, why refused 
To One by storms annoyed and adverse winds ; 
Perplexed with currents ; of his weakness sick ; 
Of vain endeavours tired ; and by his own, 
And by his nature's, ignorance, dismayed ! 
Long-wished-for sight, the Western World 
appeared ; 
And, when the ship was moored, I leaped ashore 
Indignantly — resolved to be a man, 
Who, having o'er the past no power, would live 
No longer in subjection to the past, 
With abject mind — from a tyrannic lord 
Inviting penance, fruitlessly endured : 
So, like a fugitive, whose feet have cleared 
Some boundary, which his followers may not cross 
In prosecution of their deadly chase, 
Respiring I looked round. — How bright the sun, 
The breeze how soft ! Can any thing produced 
In the old World compare, thought I, for power 
And majesty with this gigantic stream, 
Sprung from the desert ? And behold a city 
Fresh, youthful, and aspiring ! What are these 
To me, or I to them ? As much at least 
As he desires that they should be, whom winds 
And waves have wafted to this distant shore, 
In the condition of a damaged seed, 

 G 

THE EXCURSION. 

Whose fibres cannot, if they would, take root. 
Here may I roam at large ; — my business is, 
Roaming at large, to observe, and not to feel 
And, therefore, not to act — convinced that all 
Which bears the name of action, howsoe'er 
Beginning, ends in servitude — still painful, 
And mostly profitless. And, sooth to say, 
On nearer view, a motley spectacle 
Appeared, of high pretensions — unreproved 
But by the obstreperous voice of higher still ; 
Big passions strutting on a petty stage ; 
Which a detached spectator may regard 
Not unamused. — But ridicule demands 
Quick change of objects ; and, to laugh alone, 
At a composing distance from the haunts 
Of strife and folly, though it be a treat 
As choice as musing Leisure can bestow ; 
Yet, in the very centre of the crowd, 
To keep the secret of a poignant scorn, 
Howe'er to airy Demons suitable, 
Of all unsocial courses, is least fit 
For the gross spirit of mankind, — the one 
That soonest fails to please, and quickliest turns 
Into vexation. 
Let us, then, I said, 
Leave this unknit Republic to the scourge 
Of her own passions ; and to regions haste, 
Whose shades have never felt the encroaching axe, 
Or soil endured a transfer in the mart 
Of dire rapacity. There, Man abides, 
Primeval Nature's child. A creature weak 
In combination, (wherefore else driven back 
So far, and of his old inheritance 
So easily deprived ) but, for that cause, 
More dignified, and stronger in himself ; 
Whether to act, judge, suffer, or enjoy. 
True, the intelligence of social art 
Hath overpowered his forefathers, and soon 
Will sweep the remnant of his line away ; 
But contemplations, worthier, nobler far 
Than her destructive energies, attend 
His independence, when along the side 
Of Mississippi, or that northern stream 
That spreads into successive seas, he walks ; 
Pleased to perceive his own unshackled life, 
And his innate capacities of soul, 
There imaged : or when, having gained the top 
Of some commanding eminence, which yet 
Intruder ne'er beheld, he thence surveys 
Regions of wood and wide savannah, vast 
Expanse of unappropriated earth, 
With mind that sheds a light on what he sees ; 
Free as the sun, and lonely as the sun, 

Pouring above his head its radiance down 
Upon a living and rejoicing world ! 
So, westward, tow'rd the unviolated woods 
I bent my way; and, roaming far and wide, 
Failed not to greet the merry Mocking-bird ; 
And, while the melancholy Muccawiss 
(The sportive bird's companion in the grove) 
Repeated, o'er and o'er, his plaintive cry, 
I sympathised at leisure with the sound ; 
But that pure archetype of human greatness, 
I found him not. There, in his stead, appeared 
A creature, squalid, vengeful, and impure ; 
Remorseless, and submissive to no law 
But superstitious fear, and abject sloth. 
Enough is told ! Here am I — ye have heard 
What evidence I seek, and vainly seek ; 
What from my fellow-beings I require, 
And either they have not to give, or I 
Lack virtue to receive ; what I myself, 
Too oft by wilful forfeiture, have lost 
Nor can regain. How languidly I look 
Upon this visible fabric of the world, 
May be divined — perhaps it hath been said : — 
But spare your pity, if there be in me 
Aught that deserves respect : for I exist, 
Within myself, not comfortless. — The tenour 
Which my life holds, he readily may conceive 
Whoe'er hath stood to watch a mountain brook 
In some still passage of its course, and seen, 
Within the depths of its capacious breast, 
Inverted trees, rocks, clouds, and azure sky ; 
And, on its glassy surface, specks of foam, 
And conglobated bubbles undissolved, 
Numerous as stars ; that, by their onward lapse, 
Betray to sight the motion of the stream, 
Else imperceptible. Meanwhile, is heard 
A softened roar, or murmur ; and the sound 
Though soothing, and the little floating isles 
Though beautiful, are both by Nature charged 
With the same pensive office ; and make known 
Through what perplexing labyrinths, abrupt 
Precipitations, and untoward straits, 
The earth-born wanderer hath passed; and quickly, 
That respite o'er, like traverses and toils 
Must he again encounter. — Such a stream 
Is human Life ; and so the Spirit fares 
In the best quiet to her course allowed ; 
And such is mine, — save only for a hope 
That my particular current soon will reach 
The unfathomable gulf, where all is still ! " 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

i 

"book fourth. 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

ARGUMENT. 
State of feeling produced by the foregoing Narrative— A. 
belief in a superintending Providence the only adequate 
support under affliction — Wanderer's ejaculation — 
Acknowledges the difficulty of a lively faith — Hence 
immoderate sorrow— Exhortations — How received — 
Wanderer applies his discourse to that other cause of 
dejection in the Solitary's mind — Disappointment from 
the French Revolution — States grounds of hope, and 
insists on the necessity of patience and fortitude with 
respect to the course of great revolutions — Knowledge 
the source of tranquillity — Rural Solitude favourable to 
knowledge of the inferior Creatures ; Study of their 
habits and ways recommended ; exhortation to bodily 
exertion and communion with Nature— Morbid Solitude 
pitiable — Superstition better than apathy — Apathy and 
destitution unknown in the infancy of society — The 
various modes of Religion prevented it — Illustrated in 
the Jewish, Persian, Babylonian, Chaldean, and Grecian 
modes of belief — Solitary interposes — Wanderer points 
out the influence of religious and imaginative feeling in 
the humble ranks of society, illustrated from present 
and past times — These principles tend to recal exploded 
superstitions and popery — Wanderer rebuts this charge, 
and contrasts the dignities of the Imagination with the 
presumptuous littleness of certain modern Philosophers 
—Recommends other lights and guides — Asserts the 
power of the Soul to regenerate herself ; Solitary asks 
how — Reply — Personal appeal — Exhortation to activity 
of body renewed — How to commune with Nature — 
Wanderer concludes with a legitimate union of the 
imagination, affections, understanding, and reason — 
Effect of his discourse — Evening; Return to the Cottage. 
Here closed the Tenant of that lonely vale 
His mournful narrative — commenced in pain, 
In pain commenced, and ended without peace : 
Yet tempered, not unfrequently, with strains 
Of native feeling, grateful to our minds ; 
And yielding surely some relief to his, 
While we sate listening with compassion due. 
A pause of silence followed ; then, with voice 
That did not falter though the heart was moved, 
The Wanderer said': — 
" One adequate support 
For the calamities of mortal life 
Exists — one only ; an assured belief 
That the procession of our fate, howe'er 
Sad or disturbed, is ordered by a Being 
Of infinite benevolence and power ; 
Whose everlasting purposes embrace 
All accidents, converting them to good. 
— The darts of anguish fix not where the seat 

Of suffering hath been thoroughly fortified 
By acquiescence in the Will supreme 
For time and for eternity ; by faith, 
Faith absolute in God, including hope, 
And the defence that lies in boundless love 
Of his perfections ; with habitual dread 
Of aught unworthily conceived, endured 
Impatiently, ill-done, or left undone, 
To the dishonour of his holy name. 
Soul of our Souls, and safeguard of the world ! 
Sustain, thou only canst, the sick of heart; 
Restore their languid spirits, and recal 
Their lost affections unto thee and thine !" 
Then, as we issued from that covert nook, 
He thus continued, lifting up his eyes 
To heaven : — " How beautiful this dome of sky ; 
And the vast hills, in fluctuation fixed 
At thy command, how awful ! Shall the Soul, 
Human and rational, report of thee 
Even less than these? — Be mute who will, who 
can, 
Yet I will praise thee with impassioned voice : 
My lips, that may forget thee in the crowd, 
Cannot forget thee here ; where thou hast built, 
For thy own glory, in the wilderness ! 
Me didst thou constitute a priest of thine, 
In such a temple as we now behold 
Reared for thy presence : therefore, am I bound 
To worship, here, and every where — as one 
Not doomed to ignorance, though forced to tread, 
From childhood up, the ways of poverty ; 
From unreflecting ignorance preserved, 
And from debasement rescued. — By thy grace 
The particle divine remained unquenched ; 
And, 'mid the wild weeds of a rugged soil, 
Thy bounty caused to flourish deathless flowers, 
From paradise transplanted : wintry age 
Impends ; the frost will gather round my heart ; 
If the flowers wither, I am worse than dead ! 
— Come, labour, when the worn-out frame requires 
Perpetual sabbath ; come, disease and want ; 
And sad exclusion through decay of sense ; 
But leave me unabated trust in thee — 
And let thy favour, to the end of life, 
Inspire me with ability to seek 
Repose and hope among eternal things — 
Father of heaven and earth ! and I am rich, 
And will possess my portion in content ! 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

And what are things eternal? — powers depart," 
The grey-haired Wanderer stedfastly replied, 
Answering the question which himself had asked, 
" Possessions vanish, and opinions change, 
And passions hold a fluctuating seat : 
But, by the storms of circumstance unshaken, 
| And subject neither to eclipse nor wane, 
Duty exists ; — immutably survive, 
For our support, the measures and the forms, 
Which an abstract intelligence supplies ; 
Whose kingdom is, where time and space are not. 
Of other converse which mind, soul, and heart, 
Do, with united urgency, require, 
What more that may not perish ? — Thou, dread 
source, 
Prime, self-existing cause and end of all 
That in the scale of being fill then- place ; 
Above our human region, or below, 
Set and sustained ; — thou, who didst wrap the cloud 
Of infancy around us, that thyself, 
Therein, with our simplicity awhile 
Might'st hold, on earth, communion undisturbed ; 
Who from the anarchy of dreaming sleep, 
Or from its death-like void, with punctual care, 
And touch as gentle as the morning light, 
Restor'st us, daily, to the powers of sense 
And reason's stedfast rule — thou, thou alone 
Art everlasting, and the blessed Spirits, 
Which thou includest, as the sea her waves : 
For adoration thou endur'st ; endure 
For consciousness the motions of thy will ; 
For apprehension those transcendent truths 
Of the pure intellect, that stand as laws 
(Submission constituting strength and power) 
Even to thy Being's infinite majesty ! 
This universe shall pass away- — a work 
Glorious ! because the shadow of thy might, 
A step, or link, for intercourse with thee. 
Ah ! if the time must come, in which my feet 
No more shall stray where meditation leads, 
By flowing stream, through wood, or craggy wild, 
Loved haunts like these ; the unimprisoned Mind 
May yet have scope to range among her own, 
Her thoughts, her images, her high desires. 
If the dear faculty of sight should fail, 
Still, it may be allowed me to remember 
What visionary powers of eye and soul 
In youth were mine ; when, stationed on the top 
Of some huge hill — expectant, I beheld 
The sun rise up, from distant climes returned 
Darkness to chase, and sleep ; and bring the day 
His bounteous gift ! or saw him toward the deep 
Sink, with a retinue of flaming clouds 
Attended ; then, my spirit was entranced 

' 

With joy exalted to beatitude , 
The measure of my soul was filled with bliss, 
And holiast love ; as earth, sea, air, with light, 
With pomp, with glory, with magnificence ! 
Those fervent raptures are for ever flown ; 
And, since their date, my soul hath undergone 
Change manifold, for better or for worse : 
Yet cease I not to struggle, and aspire 
Heavenward ; and chide the part of me that fla^s, 
Through sinful choice ; or dread necessity 
On human nature from above imposed. 
'Tis, by comparison, an easy task 
Earth to despise ; but, to converse with heaven — 
This is not easy : — to relinquish all 
We have, or hope, of happiness and joy, 
And stand in freedom loosened from this world, 
I deem not arduous ; but must needs confess 
That 'tis a thing impossible to frame 
Conceptions equal to the soul's desires ; 
And the most difficult of tasks to Tceep 
Heights which the soul is competent to gam. 
— Man is of dust : ethereal hopes are his, 
Which, when they should sustain themselves aloft, 
Want due consistence ; like a pillar of smoke, 
That with majestic energy from earth 
Rises ; but, having reached the thinner air, 
Melts, and dissolves, and is no longer seen. 
From this infirmity of mortal kind 
Sorrow proceeds, which else were not ; at least, 
If grief be something hallowed and ordained, 
If, in proportion, it be just and meet, 
Yet, through this weakness of the general heart, 
Is it enabled to maintain its hold 
In that excess which conscience disapproves. 
For who could sink and settle to that point 
Of selfishness ; so senseless who could be 
As long and perseveringly to mourn 
For any object of his love, removed 
From this unstable world, if he could fix 
A satisfying view upon that state 
Of pure, imperishable, blessedness, 
Which reason promises, and holy writ 
Ensures to all believers  — Yet mistrust 
Is of such incapacity, methinks, 
No natural branch ; despondency far less ; 
And, least of all, is absolute despair. 
— And, if there be whose tender frames have drooped 
Even to the dust ; apparently, through weight 
Of anguish unrelieved, and lack of power 
An agonizing sorrow to transmute ; 
Deem not that proof is here of hope withheld 
When wanted most ; a confidence impaired 
So pitiably, that, having ceased to see 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

• With bodily eyes, they are borne down by love 
\ Of what is lost, and perish through regret. 
'■ Oh ! no, the innocent Sufferer often sees 
Too clearly ; feels too vividly ; and longs 
To realize the vision, with intense 
And over-constant yearning ; — there — there lies 
The excess, by which the balance is destroyed. 
Too, too contracted are these walls of flesh, 
This vital warmth too cold, these visual orbs, 
. Though inconceivably endowed, too dim 
For any passion of the soul that leads 
To ecstasy ; and, all the crooked paths 
Of time and change disdaining, takes its course 
j Along the line of limitless desires. 
; I, speaking now from such disorder free, 
Nor rapt, nor craving, but in settled peace, 
I cannot doubt that they whom you deplore 
Are glorified ; or, if they sleep, shall wake 
From sleep, and dwell with God in endless love. 
Hope, below this, consists not with belief 
In mercy, carried infinite degrees 
Beyond the tenderness of human hearts : 
Hope, below this, consists not with belief 
In perfect wisdom, guiding mightiest power, 
That finds no limits but her own pure will. 
Here then we rest; not fearing for our creed 
The worst that human reasoning can achieve, 
To unsettle or perplex it : yet with pain 
Acknowledging, and grievous self-reproach, 
That, though immovably convinced, we want 
(Zeal, and the virtue to exist by faith 
| As soldiers live by courage ; as, by strength 
Of heart, the sailor fights with roaring seas. 
Alas ! the endowment of immortal power 
i Is matched unequally with custom, time, 
i And domineering faculties of sense 
In all; in most with superadded foes, 
Idle temptations ; open vanities, 
Ephemeral offspring of the unblushing world ; 
And, in the private regions of the mind, 
Ill-governed passions, ranklings of despite, 
Immoderate wishes, pining discontent, 
'Distress and care. What then remains ? — To seek 
Those helps for his occasions ever near 
Who lacks not will to use them ; vows, renewed 
On the first motion of a holy thought ; 
; Vigils of contemplation ; praise ; and prayer — 
jA stream, which, from the fountain of the heart 
(Issuing, however feebly, nowhere flows 
• Without access of unexpected strength. 
• But, above all, the victory is most sure 
'For him, who, seeking faith by virtue, strives 
(To yield entire submission to the law 

Of conscience — conscience reverenced and obeyed, 
As God's most intimate presence in the soul, 
And his most perfect image in the world. 
— Endeavour thus to five; these rules regard ; 
These helps solicit ; and a stedfast seat 
Shall then be yours among the happy few 
Who dwell on earth, yet breathe empyreal air, 
Sons of the morning. For your nobler part, 
Ere disencumbered of her mortal chains, 
Doubt shall be quelled and trouble chased away ; 
With only such degree of sadness left 
As may support longings of pure desire ; 
And strengthen love, rejoicing secretly 
In the sublime attractions of the grave." 
While, in this strain, the venerable Sage 
Poured forth his aspirations, and announced 
His judgments, near that lonely house we paced 
A plot of green-sward, seemingly preserved 
By nature's care from wreck of scattered stones, 
And from encroachment of encircling heath : 
Small space ! but, for reiterated steps, 
Smooth and commodious ; as a stately deck 
Which to and fro the mariner is used 
To tread for pastime, talking with his mates, 
Or haply thinking of far-distant friends, 
While the ship glides before a steady breeze. 
Stillness prevailed around us : and the voice 
That spake was capable to lift the soul 
Toward regions yet more tranquil. But, methought, 
That he, whose fixed despondency had given 
Impulse and motive to that strong discourse, 
Was less upraised in spirit than abashed ; 
Shrinking from admonition, like a man 
Who feels that to exhort is to reproach. 
Yet not to be diverted from his aim, 
The Sage continued : — 
"For that other loss, 
The loss of confidence hi social man, 
By the unexpected transports of our age 
Carried so high, that every thought, which looked 
Beyond the temporal destiny of the Kind, 
To many seemed superfluous — as, no cause 
Could e'er for such exalted confidence 
Exist ; so, none is now for fixed despair : 
The two extremes are equally disowned 
By reason : if, with sharp recoil, from one 
You have been driven far as its opposite, 
Between them seek the point whereon to build 
Sound expectations. So doth he advise 
Who shared at first the illusion ; but was soon 
Cast from the pedestal of pride by shocks 
Which Nature gently gave, in woods and fields ; 
Nor unreproved by Providence, thus speaking 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

To the inattentive children of the world : 
 Vain-glorious Generation ! what new powers 
' On you have heen conferred % what gifts, withheld 
' From your progenitors, have ye received, 
 Fit recompense of new desert ? what claim 
' Are ye prepared to urge, that my decrees 
' For you should undergo a sudden change ; 
' And the weak functions of one husy day, 
' Reclaiming and extirpating, perform 
' What all the slowly-moving years of time, 
' With their united force, have left undone ? 
' By nature's gradual processes be taught ; 
' By story be confounded ! Ye aspire 
' Rashly, to fall once more ; and that false fruit, 
' Which, to your over-weening spirits, yields 
' Hope of a flight celestial, will produce 
' Misery and shame. But Wisdom of her sons 
' Shall not the less, though late, be justified.' 
Such timely warning," said the Wanderer, "gave 
That visionary voice ; and, at this day, 
When a Tartarean darkness overspreads 
The groaning nations ; when the impious rule, 
By will or by established ordinance, 
Their own dire agents, and constrain the good 
To acts which they abhor ; though I bewail 
This triumph, yet the pity of my heart 
Prevents me not from owning, that the law, 
By which mankind now suffers, is most just. 
For by superior energies ; more strict 
Affiance in each other ; faith more firm 
In their unhallowed principles ; the bad 
Have fairly earned a victory o'er the weak, 
The vacillating, inconsistent good. 
Therefore, not unconsoled, I wait — in hope 
To see the moment, when the righteous cause 
Shall gain defenders zealous and devout 
As they who have opposed her ; in which Virtue 
Will, to her efforts, tolerate no bounds 
That are not lofty as her rights ; aspiring 
By impulse of her own ethereal zeal. 
That spirit only can redeem mankind ; 
And when that sacred spirit shall appear, 
Then shall our triumph be complete as theirs. 
Yet, should this confidence prove vain, the wise 
Have still the keeping of their proper peace ; 
Are guardians of their own tranquillity. 
They act, or they recede, observe, and feel ; 
' Knowing the heart of man is set to be 
The centre of this world, about the which 
Those revolutions of disturbances 
Still roll ; where all the aspects of misery 
Predominate ; whose strong effects are such 
As he must bear, being powerless to redress ; 

And that unless above himself he can 
Erect himself , how poor a thing is Man J' 
Happy is he who lives to understand, 
Not human nature only, but explores 
All natures,— to the end that he may find 
The law that governs each ; and where begins 
The union, the partition where, that makes 
Kind and degree, among all visible Beings ; 
The constitutions, powers, and faculties, 
Which they inherit, — cannot step beyond, — 
And cannot fall beneath ; that do assign 
To every class its station and its office, 
Through all the mighty commonwealth of things ; 
Up from the creeping plant to sovereign Man. 
Such converse, if directed by a meek, 
Sincere, and humble spirit, teaches love : 
For knowledge is delight ; and such delight 
Breeds love : yet, suited as it rather is 
To thought and to the climbing intellect, 
It teaches less to love, than to adore ; 
If that be not indeed the highest love ! " 
"Yet," said I, tempted here to interpose, 
" The dignity of life is not impaired 
By aught that innocently satisfies 
The humbler cravings of the heart ; and he 
Is a still happier man, who, for those heights 
Of speculation not unfit, descends ; 
And such benign affections cultivates 
Among the inferior kinds ; not merely those 
That he may call his own, and which depend, 
As individual objects of regard, 
Upon his care, from whom he also looks 
For signs and tokens of a mutual bond ; 
But others, far beyond this narrow sphere, 
Whom, for the very sake of love, he loves. 
Nor is it a mean praise of rural life 
And solitude, that they do favour most, 
Most frequently call forth, and best sustain, 
These pure sensations ; that can penetrate 
The obstreperous city ; on the barren seas 
Are not unfelt ; and much might recommend, 
How much they might inspirit and endear, 
The loneliness of this sublime retreat ! " 
" Yes," said the Sage, resuming the discourse 
Again directed to his downcast Friend, 
" If, with the froward will and grovelling soul 
Of man, offended, liberty is here, 
And invitation every hour renewed. 
To mark their placid state, who never heard 

 Daniel. 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

Of a command which they have power to break, 
Or rule which they are tempted to transgress : 
These, with a soothed or elevated heart, 
May we behold ; their knowledge register ; 
Observe their ways ; and, free from envy, find 
Complacence there : — but wherefore this to you ? 
I guess that, welcome to your lonely hearth, 
The redbreast, ruffled up by winter's cold 
Into a ' feathery bunch,' feeds at your hand : 
I A box, perchance, is from your casement hung 
For the small wren to build in ; — not in vain, 
The barriers disregarding that surround 
This deep abiding place, before your sight 
i Mounts on the breeze the butterfly ; and soars, 
j Small creature as she is, from earth's bright flowers, 
! Into the dewy clouds. Ambition reigns 
i In the waste wilderness : the Soul ascends 
' Drawn towards her native firmament of heaven, 
When the fresh eagle, in the month of May, 
Upborne, at evening, on replenished wing, 
: This shaded valley leaves ; and leaves the dark 
l Empui'pled hills, conspicuously renewing 
I A proud communication with the sun 
j Low sunk beneath the horizon ! — List ! — I heard, 
; From yon huge breast of rock, a voice sent forth 
: As if the visible mountain made the cry. 
; Again ! " — The effect upon the soul was such 
; As he expressed : from out the mountain's heart 
■ The solemn voice appeared to issue, startling 
j The blank air — for the region all around 
; Stood empty of all shape of life, and silent 
 Save for that single cry, the unanswer'd bleat 
j Of a poor lamb — left somewhere to itself, 
The plaintive spirit of the solitude ! 
' He paused, as if unwilling to proceed, 
i Through consciousness that silence in such place 
i Was best, the most affecting eloquence, 
i But soon his thoughts returned upon themselves, 
And, in soft tone of speech, thus he resumed. 
" Ah ! if the heart, too confidently raised, 
Perchance too lightly occupied, or lulled 
i Too easily, despise or overlook 
■ The vassalage that binds her to the earth, 
Her sad dependence upon time, and all 
-The trepidations of mortality, 
i What place so destitute and void — but there 
The little flower her vanity shall check ; 
,The trailing worm reprove her thoughtless pride ? 
i These craggy regions, these chaotic wilds, 
Does that benignity pervade, that warms 
'The mole contented with her darksome walk 
In the cold ground ; and to the emmet gives 

Her foresight, and intelligence that makes 
The tiny creatures strong by social league ; 
Supports the generations, multiplies 
Their tribes, till we behold a spacious plain 
Or grassy bottom, all, with little hills — 
Their labour, covered, as a lake with waves ; 
Thousands of cities, in the desert place 
Built up of life, and food, and means of life ! 
Nor wanting here, to entertain the thought, 
Creatures that in communities exist, 
Less, as might seem, for general guardianship 
Or through dependence upon mutual aid, 
Than by participation of delight 
And a strict love of fellowship, combined. 
What other spirit can it be that prompts 
The gilded summer flies to mix and weave 
Their sports together in the solar beam, 
Or in the gloom of twilight hum their joy? 
More obviously the self-same influence rules 
The feathered kinds ; the fieldfare's pensive flock, 
The cawing rooks, and sea-mews from afar, 
Hovering above these inland solitudes, 
By the rough wind unscattered, at whose call 
Up through the trenches of the long-drawn vales 
Their voyage was begun : nor is its power 
Unfelt among the sedentary fowl 
That seek yon pool, and there prolong their stay 
Tn silent congress ; or together roused 
Take flight; while with their clang the air resounds. 
And, over all, in that ethereal vault, 
Is the mute company of changeful clouds ; 
Bright apparition, suddenly put forth, 
The rainbow smiling on the faded storm ; 
The mild assemblage of the starry heavens ; 
And the great sun, earth's universal lord ! 
How bountiful is Nature ! he shall find 
Who seeks not ; and to him, who hath not asked, 
Large measure shall be dealt. Three sabbath-days 
Are scarcely told, since, on a service bent 
Of mere humanity, you clomb those heights ; 
And what a marvellous and heavenly show 
Was suddenly revealed ! — the swains moved on, 
And heeded not : you lingered, you perceived 
And felt, deeply as living man could feel. 
There is a luxury in self-dispraise ; 
And inward self-disparagement affords . 
To meditative spleen a grateful feast. 
Trust me, pronouncing on your own desert, 
You judge unthankfully : distempered nerves 
Infect the thoughts : the languor of the frame 
Depresses the soul's vigour. Quit your couch — 
Cleave not so fondly to your moody cell ; 
Nor let the hallowed powers, that shed from heaven 
o o 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Stillness and rest, with disapproving eye 
Look down upon your taper, through a watch 
Of midnight hours, unseasonably twinkling 
In this deep Hollow, like a sullen star 
Dimly reflected in a lonely pool. 
Take courage, and withdraw yourself from ways 
That run not parallel to nature's course. 
Rise with the lark ! your matins shall obtain 
Grace, be their composition what it may, 
If but with hers performed ; climb once again, 
Climb every day, those ramparts ; meet the breeze 
Upon their tops, adventurous as a bee 
That from your garden thither soars, to feed 
On new-blown heath ; let yon commanding rock 
Be your frequented watch-tower ; roll the stone 
In thunder down the mountains; with all your 
might 
Chase the wild goat ; and if the bold red deer 
Fly to those harbours, driven by hound and horn 
Loud echoing, add your speed to the pursuit ; 
So, wearied to your hut shall you return, 
And sink at evening into sound repose." 
The Solitary lifted toward the hills 
A kindling eye : — accordant feelings rushed 
Into my bosom, whence these words broke forth : 
" Oh ! what a joy it were, in vigorous health, 
To have a body (this our vital frame 
With shrinking sensibility endued, 
And all the nice regards of flesh and blood) 
And to the elements surrender it 
As if it were a spirit ! — How divine, 
The liberty, for frail, for mortal, man 
To roam at large among unpeopled glens 
And mountainous retirements, only trod 
By devious footsteps ; regions consecrate 
To oldest time ! and, reckless of the storm 
That keeps the raven quiet in her nest, 
Be as a presence or a motion — one 
Among the many there ; and while the mists 
Flying, and rainy vapours, caU out shapes 
And phantoms from the crags and solid earth 
As fast as a musician scatters sounds 
Out of an instrument ; and while the streams 
(As at a first creation and in haste 
To exercise their untried faculties) 
Descending from the region of the clouds, 
And starting from the hollows of the earth 
More multitudinous every moment, rend 
Their way before them — what a joy to roam 
An equal among mightiest energies ; 
And haply sometimes with articulate voice, 
Amid the deafening tumult, scarcely heard 
By him that utters it, exclaim aloud, 

' Rage on ye elements ! let moon and stars 
Them aspects lend, and mingle in their turn 
With this commotion (ruinous though it be) 
From day to night,from night to day, prolonged ! '" 
" Yes," said the Wanderer, taking from my lips 
The strain of transport, " whosoe'er in youth 
Has, through ambition of his soul, given way 
To such desires, and grasped at such delight, 
Shall feel congenial stirrings late and long, 
In spite of all the weakness that fife brings, 
Its cares and sorrows; he, though taught to own 
The tranquillizing power of time, shall wake, 
Wake sometimes to a noble restlessness — 
Loving the sports which once he gloried in. 
Compatriot, Friend, remote are Garry's hills, 
The streams far distant of your native glen ; 
Yet is their form and image here expressed 
With brotherly resemblance. Turn your steps 
Wherever fancy leads ; by day, by night, 
Are various engines working, not the same 
As those with which your soul in youth was moved, 
But by the great Artificer endowed 
With no inferior power. You dwell alone ; 
You walk, you live, you speculate alone ; 
Yet doth remembrance, like a sovereign prince, 
For you a stately gallery maintain 
Of gay or tragic pictures. You have seen, 
Have acted, suffered, travelled far, observed 
With no incurious eye ; and books are yours, 
Within whose silent chambers treasure lies 
Preserved from age to age ; more precious far 
Than that accumulated store of gold 
And orient gems, which, for a day of need, 
The Sultan hides deep in ancestral tombs. 
These hoards of truth you can unlock at will : 
And music waits upon your skilful touch, 
Sounds which the wandering shepherd from these 
heights 
Hears, and forgets his purpose ; — furnished thus, 
How can you droop, if willing to be upraised ? 
A piteous lot it were to flee from Man — 
Yet not rejoice in Nature. He, whose hours 
Are by domestic pleasures uncaressed 
And unenlivened ; who exists whole years 
Apart from benefits received or done 
'Mid the transactions of the bustling crowd ; 
Who neither hears, nor feels a wish to hear, 
Of the world's interests — such a one hath need 
Of a quick fancy, and an active heart, 
That, for the day's consumption, books may yield 
Food not unwholesome ; earth and air correct 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

His morbid humour, with delight supplied 
Or solace, varying as the seasons change. 
— Truth has her pleasure-grounds, her haunts of 
ease 
And easy contemplation ; gay parterres, 
And labyrinthine walks, her sunny glades 
And shady groves in studied contrast — each, 
For recreation, leading into each : 
These may he range, if willing to partake 
Their soft indulgences, and in due time 
May issue thence, recruited for the tasks 
! And course of service Truth requires from those 
Who tend her altars, wait upon her throne, 
And guard her fortresses. Who thinks, and feels, 
And recognises ever and anon 
The breeze of nature stirring in his soul, 
Why need such man go desperately astray, 
And nurse ' the dreadful appetite of death ? ' 
If tired with systems, each in its degree 
Substantial, and all crumbling in their turn, 
Let him build systems of his own, and smile 
At the fond work, demolished with a touch ; 
If unreligious, let him be at once 
Among ten thousand innocents, enrolled 
A pupil in the many-chambered school, 
Where superstition weaves her airy dreams. 
Life's autumn past, I stand on winter's verge ; 
And daily lose what I desire to keep : 
Yet rather would I instantly decline 
To the traditionary sympathies 
i Of a most rustic ignorance, and take 
A fearful apprehension from the owl 
 Or death-watch : and as readily rejoice, 
If two auspicious magpies crossed my way ; — 
To this would rather bend than see and hear 
The repetitions wearisome of sense, 
Where soul is dead, and feeling hath no place ; 
Where knowledge, ill begun in cold remark 
On outward things, with formal inference ends ; 
Or, if the mind turn inward, she recoils 
At once — or, not recoiling, is perplexed — 
■ Lost in a gloom of uninspired research ; 
Meanwhile, the heart within the heart, the seat 
Where peace and happy consciousness should 
dwell, 
On its own axis restlessly revolving, 
Seeks, yet can nowhere find, the light of truth. 
Upon the breast of new-created earth 
Man walked ; and when and wheresoe'er he moved, 
I Alone or mated, solitude was not. 
He heard, borne on the wind, Ihe articulate voice 
' Of God ; and Angels to his sight appeared 

Crowning the glorious hills of paradise ; 
Or through the groves gliding like morning mist 
Enkindled by the sun. He sate — and talked 
With winged Messengers ; who daily brought 
To his small island in the ethereal deep 
Tidings of joy and love. — From those pure heights 
(Whether of actual vision, sensible 
To sight and feeling, or that in this sort 
Have condescendingly been shadowed forth 
Communications spiritually maintained, 
And intuitions moral and divine) 
Fell Human-kind — to banishment condemned 
That flowing years repealed not : and distress 
And grief spread wide ; but Man escaped the doom 
Of destitution ; — solitude was not. 
— Jehovah — shapeless Power above all Powers, 
Single and one, the omnipresent God, 
By vocal utterance, or blaze of light, 
Or cloud of darkness, localised in heaven ; 
On earth, enshrined within the wandering ark ; 
Or, out of Sion, thundering from his throne 
Between the Cherubim — on the chosen Race 
Showered miracles, and ceased not to dispense 
Judgments, that filled the land from age to age 
With hope, and love, and gratitude, and fear ; 
And with amazement smote ; — thereby to assert 
His scorned, or unacknowledged, sovereignty. 
And when the One, ineffable of name, 
Of nature indivisible, withdrew 
From mortal adoration or regard, 
Not then was Deity engulfed ; nor Man, 
The rational creature, left, to feel the weight 
Of his own reason, without sense or thought 
Of higher reason and a purer will, 
To benefit and bless, through mightier power : — 
Whether the Persian — zealous to reject 
Altar and image, and the inclusive walls 
And roofs of temples built by human hands — 
To loftiest heights ascending, from their tops, 
With myrtle-wreathed tiara on his brow, 
Presented sacrifice to moon and stars, 
And to the winds and mother elements, 
And the whole circle of the heavens, for him 
A sensitive existence, and a God, 
With lifted hands invoked, and songs of praise : 
Or, less reluctantly to bonds of sense 
Yielding his soul, the Babylonian framed 
For influence undefined a personal shape ; 
And, from the plain, with toil immense, upreared 
Tower eight times planted on the top of tower, 
That Belus, nightly to his splendid couch 
Descending, there might rest ; upon that height 
Pure and serene, diffused— to overlook 
Winding Euphrates, and the city vast 
oo  

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Of his devoted worshippers, far-stretched, 
With grove and field and garden interspersed ; 
Their town, and foodfnl region for support 
Against the pressure of beleaguering war. 
Chaldean Shepherds, ranging trackless fields, 
Beneath the concave of unclouded skies 
Spread like a sea, in boundless solitude, 
Looked on the polar star, as on a guide 
And guardian of their course, that never closed 
His stedfast eye. The planetary Five 
With a submissive reverence they beheld ; 
Watched, from the centre of their sleeping flocks, 
Those radiant Mercuries, that seemed to move 
Carrying through ether, in perpetual round, 
Decrees and resolutions of the Gods ; 
And, by their aspects, signifying works 
Of dim futurity, to Man revealed. 
— The imaginative faculty was lord 
Of observations natural ; and, thus 
Led on, those shepherds made report of stars 
In set rotation passing to and fro, 
Between the orbs of our apparent sphere 
And its invisible counterpart, adorned 
With answering constellations, under earth, 
Removed from all approach of living sight 
But present to the dead ; who, so they deemed, 
Like those celestial messengers beheld 
All accidents, and judges were of all. 
The lively Grecian, in a land of hills, 
Rivers and fertile plains, and sounding shores, — 
Under a cope of sky more variable, 
Could find commodious place for every God, 
Promptly received, as prodigally brought, 
From the surrounding countries, at the choice 
' Of all adventurers. With unrivalled skill, 
As nicest observation furnished hints 
For studious fancy, his quick hand bestowed 
On fluent operations a fixed shape ; 
Metal or stone, idolatrously served. 
And yet — triumphant o'er this pompous show 
Of art, this palpable array of sense, 
On every side encountered ; in despite 
Of the gross fictions chanted in the streets 
By wandering Rhapsodists ; and in contempt 
Of doubt and bold denial hourly urged 
Amid the wrangling schools — a spirit hung, 
Beautiful region ! o'er thy towns and farms, 
Statues and temples, and memorial tombs ; 
And emanations were perceived ; and acts 
Of immortality, in Nature's course, 
Exemplified by mysteries, that were felt 
As bonds, on grave philosopher imposed 

And armed warrior ; and in every grove 
A gay or pensive tenderness prevailed, 
When piety more awful had relaxed. 
— ' Take, running river, take these locks of mine' — 
Thus would the Votary say — ' this severed hair, 
' My vow fulfilling, do I here present, 
' Thankful for my beloved child's return. 
' Thy banks, Cephisus, he again hath trod, 
c Thy murmurs heard; and drunk the crystal lymph 
' With which thou dost refresh the thirsty lip, 
' And, all day long, moisten these flowery fields ! ' 
And doubtless, sometimes, when the hair was shed 
Upon the flowing stream, a thought arose 
Of Life continuous, Being unimpaired ; 
That hath been, is, and where it was and is 
There shall endure, — existence unexposed 
To the blind walk of mortal accident ; 
From diminution safe and weakening age ; 
While man grows old, and dwindles, and decays ; 
And countless generations of mankind 
Depart ; and leave no vestige where they trod. 
We live by Admiration, Hope, and Love ; 
And, even as these are well and wisely fixed, 
In dignity of being we ascend. 
But what is error ?" — "Answer he who can !" 
The Sceptic somewhat haughtily exclaimed : 
" Love, Hope, and Admiration — are they not 
Mad Fancy's favourite vassals ? Does not fife 
Use them, full oft, as pioneers to ruin, 
Guides to destruction ? Is it well to trust 
Imagination's light when reason's fails, 
The unguarded taper where the guarded faints ? 
— Stoop from those heights, and soberly declare 
What error is ; and, of our errors, which 
Doth most debase the mind ; the genuine seats 
Of power, where are they ? Who shall regulate, 
With truth, the scale of intellectual rank ?" 
" Methinks," persuasively the Sage replied, 
" That for this arduous office you possess 
Some rare advantages. Your early days 
A grateful recollection must supply 
Of much exalted good by Heaven vouchsafed 
To dignify the humblest state. — Your voice 
Hath, in my hearing, often testified 
That poor men's children, they, and they alone, 
By their condition taught, can understand 
The wisdom of the prayer that daily asks 
For daily bread. A consciousness is yours 
How feelingly religion may be learned 
In smoky cabins, from a mother's tongue — 
Heard while the dwelling vibrates to the din 
Of the contiguous torrent, gathering strength 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

At every moment — and, with strength, increase 
Of fury; or, while snow is at the door, 
Assaulting and defending, and the wind, 
' A sightless labourer, whistles at his work — 
Fearful ; but resignation tempers fear, 
And piety is sweet to infant minds. 
— The Shepherd-lad, that in the sunshine carves, 
On the green turf, a dial — to divide 
The silent hours ; and who to that report 
Can portion out his pleasures, and adapt, 
Throughout a long and lonely summer's day 
His round of pastoral duties, is not left 
With less intelligence for moral things 
Of gravest import. Early he perceives, 
Within himself, a measure and a rule, 
Which to the sun of truth he can apply, 
That shines for him, and shines for all mankind. 
Experience daily fixing his regards 
On nature's wants, he knows how few they are, 
And where they lie, how answered and appeased. 
This knowledge ample recompense affords 
For manifold privations ; he refers 
His notions to this standard ; on this rock 
Rests his desires ; and hence, in after life, 
Soul-strengthening patience, and sublime content. 
Imagination — not permitted here 
To waste her powers, as in the worldling's mind, 
On fickle pleasures, and superfluous cares, 
And trivial ostentation — is left free 
And puissant to range the solemn walks 
Of time and nature, girded by a zone 
That, while it binds, invigorates and supports. 
Acknowledge, then, that whether by the side 
Of his poor hut, or on the mountain top, 
Or in the cultured field, a Man so bred 
(Take from him what you will upon the score 
Of ignorance or illusion) lives and breathes 
For noble purposes of mind : his heart 
Beats to the heroic song of ancient days ; 
His eye distinguishes, his soul creates. 
And those illusions, which excite the scorn 
Or move the pity of unthinking minds, 
Are they not mainly outward ministers 
Of inwax-d conscience ? with whose service charged 
They came and go, appeared and disappear, 
Diverting evil purposes, remorse 
Awakening, chastening an intemperate grief, 
Or pride of heart abating : and, whene'er 
For less important ends those phantoms move, 
Who would forbid them, if their presence serve, 
On thinly-peopled mountains and wild heaths, 
Filling a space, else vacant, to exalt 
The forms of Nature, and enlarge her powers ? 

Once more to distant ages of the world 
Let us revert, and place before our thoughts 
The face which rural solitude might wear 
To the unenlightened swains of pagan Greece. 
— In that fair clime, the lonely herdsman, stretched 
On the soft grass through half a summer's day, 
With music lulled his indolent repose : 
And, in some fit of weariness, if he, 
When his own breath was silent, chanced to hear 
A distant strain, far sweeter than the sounds 
Which his poor skiU could make, his fancy fetched, 
Even from the blazing chariot of the sun, 
A beardless Youth, who touched a golden lute, 
And filled the illumined groves with ravishment. 
The nightly hunter, lifting a bright eye 
Up towards the crescent moon, with grateful heart 
Called on the lovely wanderer who bestowed 
That timely light, to share his joyous sport: 
And hence, a beaming Goddess with her Nymphs, 
Across the lawn and through the darksome grove, 
Not unaccompanied with tuneful notes 
By echo multiplied from rock or cave, 
Swept in the storm of chase ; as moon and stars 
Glance rapidly along the clouded heaven, 
When winds are blowing strong. The traveller 
slaked 
His thirst from rill or gushing fount, and thanked 
The Naiad. Sunbeams, upon distant hills 
Gliding apace, with shadows in their train, 
Might, with small help from fancy, be transformed 
Into fleet Oreads sporting visibly. 
The Zephyrs fanning, as they passed, their wings, 
Lacked not, for love, fair objects whom they wooed 
With gentle whisper. Withered boughs grotesque, 
Stripped of their leaves and twigs by hoary age, 
From depth of shaggy covert peeping forth 
In the low vale, or on steep mountain side ; 
And, sometimes, intermixed with stirring horns 
Of the live deer, or goat's depending beard, — 
These were the lurking Satyrs, a wild brood 
Of gamesome Deities ; or Pan himself, 
The simple shepherd's awe-inspiring God !" 
The strain was aptly chosen; and I could mark 
Its kindly influence, o'er the yielding brow 
Of our Companion, gradually diffused ; 
While, listening, he had paced the noiseless turf, 
Like one whose untired ear a murmuring stream 
Detains ; but tempted now to interpose, 
He with a smile exclaimed : — ■ 
" 'Tis well you speak 
At a safe distance from our native land, 
And from the mansions where our youth was 
taught. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

The true descendants of those godly men 
Who swept from Scotland, in a flame of zeal, 
Shrine, altar, image, and the massy piles 
That harboured them, — the souls retaining yet 
The churlish features of that after-race 
Who fled to woods, caverns, and jutting rocks, 
In deadly scorn of superstitious rites, 
Or what their scruples construed to be such — 
How, think you, would they tolerate this scheme 
Of fine propensities, that tends, if urged 
Far as it might be urged, to sow afresh 
The weeds of Romish phantasy, in vain 
Uprooted ; would re-consecrate our wells 
To good Saint Fillan and to fair Saint Anne ; 
And from long banishment recal Saint Giles, 
To watch again with tutelary love 
O'er stately Edinborough throned on crags ? 
A blessed restoration, to behold 
The patron, on the shoulders of his priests. 
Once more parading through her crowded streets 
Now simply guarded by the sober powers 
Of science, and philosophy, and sense ! " 
This answer followed. — " You have turned my 
thoughts 
Upon our brave Progenitors, who rose 
Against idolatry with warlike mind, 
And shrunk from vain observances, to lurk 
In woods, and dwell under impending rocks 
Ill-sheltered, and oft wanting fire and food ; 
Why ? — for this very reason that they felt, 
And did acknowledge, wheresoe'er they moved, 
A spiritual presence, oft-times misconceived, 
But still a high dependence, a divine 
Bounty and government, that filled their hearts 
With joy, and gratitude, and fear, and love ; 
And from their fervent lips drew hymns of praise, 
That through, the desert rang. Though favoured 
less, 
Far less, than these, yet such, in their degree, 
Were those bewildered Pagans of old time. 
Beyond their own poor natures and above 
They looked ; were humbly thankful for the good 
Which the warm sun solicited, and earth 
Bestowed ; were gladsome, — and their moral sense 
They fortified with reverence for the Gods; 
And they had hopes that overstepped the Grave. 
Now, shall our great Discoverers," he exclaimed, 
Raising his voice triumphantly, " obtain 
From sense and reason less than these obtained, 
Though far misled ? Shall men for whom our age 
Unbaffled powers of vision hath prepared, 
To explore the world without and world within, 

Be joyless as the blind? Ambitious spirits — 
Whom earth, at this late season, hath produced 
To regulate the moving spheres, and weigh 
The planets in the hollow of their hand ; 
And they who rather dive than soar, whose pains 
Have solved the elements, or analysed 
The thinking principle — shall they in fact 
Prove a degraded Race ? and what avails 
Renown, if their presumption make them such ? 
Oh ! there is laughter at their work in heaven ! 
Inquire of ancient Wisdom ; go, demand 
Of mighty Nature, if 'twas ever meant 
That we should pry far off yet be unraised ; 
That we should pore, and dwindle as we pore, 
Viewing all objects unremittingly 
In disconnexion dead and spiritless ; 
And still dividing, and dividing still, 
Break down all grandeur, still unsatisfied 
With the perverse attempt, while littleness 
May yet become more little ; waging thus 
An impious warfare with the very life 
Of our own souls ! 
And if indeed there be 
An all-pervading Spirit, upon whom 
Our dark foundations rest, could he design 
That this magnificent effect of power, 
The earth we tread, the sky that we behold 
By day, and all the pomp which night reveals ; 
That these — and that superior mystery 
Our vital frame, so fearfully devised, 
And the dread soul within it — should exist 
Only to be examined, pondered, searched, 
Probed, vexed, and criticised ? — Accuse me not 
Of arrogance, unknown Wanderer as I am, 
If, having walked with Nature threescore years, 
And offered, far as frailty would allow, 
My heart a daily sacrifice to Truth, 
I now affirm of Nature and of Truth, 
Whom I have served, that their Divinity 
Revolts, offended at the ways of men 
Swayed by such motives, to such ends employed ; 
Philosophers, who, though the human soul 
Be of a thousand faculties composed, 
And twice ten thousand interests, do yet prize 
This soul, and the transcendent universe, 
No more than as a mirror that reflects 
To proud Self-love her own intelligence ; 
That one, poor, finite object, in the abyss 
Of infinite Being, twinkling restlessly ! 
Nor higher place can be assigned to him 
And his compeers — the laughing Sage of France. — 
Crowned was he, if my memory do not err, 
With laurel planted upon hoary hairs, 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

In sign of conquest by his wit achieved 
And benefits his wisdom had conferred ; 
His stooping body tottered with wreaths of flowers 
Opprest, far less becoming ornaments 
Than Spring oft twines about a mouldering tree ; 
Yet so it pleased a fond, a vain, old Man, 
And a most frivolous people. Him I mean 
Who penned, to ridicule confiding faith, 
This sorry Legend ; which by chance we found 
Piled in a nook, through malice, as might seem, 
Among more innocent rubbish." — Speaking thus, 
With a brief notice when, and how, and where, 
We had espied the book, he drew it forth ; 
And courteously, as if the act removed, 
At once, all traces from the good Man's heart 
Of unbenign aversion or contempt, 
Restored it to its owner. " Gentle Friend," 
• Herewith he grasped the Solitary's hand, 
' " You have known lights and guides better than these. 
Ah ! let not aught amiss within dispose 
i A noble mind to practise on herself, 
And tempt opinion to support the wrongs 
J Of passion : whatsoe'er be felt or feared, 
From higher judgment-seats make no appeal 
To lower : can you question that the soul 
Inherits an allegiance, not by choice 
To be cast off, upon an oath proposed 
By each new upstart notion ? In the ports 
Of levity no refuge can be found, 
' No shelter, for a spirit in distress. 
He, who by wilful disesteem of life 
, And proud insensibility to hope, 
i Affronts the eye of Solitude, shall learn 
That her miTd nature can be terrible ; 
' That neither she nor Silence lack the power 
, To avenge their own insulted majesty. 
blest seclusion ! when the mind admits 
! The law of duty; and can therefore move 
I Through each vicissitude of loss and gain, 
: Linked in entire complacence with her choice ; 
; When youth's presumptuousness is mellowed down, 
i And manhood's vain anxiety dismissed ; 
' When wisdom shows her seasonable fruit, 
; Upon the boughs of sheltering leisure hung 
In sober plenty ; when the spirit stoops 
To drink with gratitude the crystal stream 
Of unreproved enjoyment; and is pleased 
, To muse, and be saluted by the air 
! Of meek repentance, wafting wall-flower scents 
| From out the crumbling ruins of fallen pride 
And chambers of transgression, now forlorn. 
| , calm contented days, and peaceful nights ! 
Who, when such good can be obtained, would strive 

To reconcile his manhood to a couch 
Soft, as may seem, but, under that disguise, 
Stuffed with the thorny substance of the past 
For fixed annoyance ; and full oft beset 
With floating dreams, black and disconsolate, 
The vapoury phantoms of futurity ? 
Within the soul a faculty abides, 
That with interpositions, which would hide 
And darken, so can deal that they become 
Contingencies of pomp ; and serve to exalt 
Her native brightness. As the ample moon, 
In the deep stillness of a summer even 
Rising behind a thick and lofty grove, 
Burns, like an unconsuming fire of light, 
In the green trees ; and, kindling on all sides 
Their leafy umbrage, turns the dusky veil 
Into a substance glorious as her own, 
Yea, with her own incorporated, by power 
Capacious and serene. Like power abides 
In man's celestial spirit ; virtue thus 
Sets forth and magnifies herself ; thus feeds 
A calm, a beautiful, and silent fire, 
From the encumbrances of mortal life, 
From error, disappointment — nay, from guilt ; 
And sometimes, so relenting justice wills, 
From palpable oppressions of despair." 
The Solitary by these words was touched 
With manifest emotion, and exclaimed ; 
"But how begin? and whence?— 'The Mind is 
free — 
Resolve,' the haughty Moralist would say, 
 This single act is all that we demand.' 
Alas ! such wisdom bids a creature fly 
Whose very sorrow is, that time hath shorn 
His natural wings ! — To friendship let him turn 
For succour ; but perhaps he sits alone 
On stormy waters, tossed in a little boat 
That holds but him, and can contain no more ! 
Religion tells of amity sublime 
Which no condition can preclude ; of One 
Who sees all suffering, comprehends all wants, 
All weakness fathoms, can supply all needs : 
But is that bounty absolute ? — His gifts, 
Are they not, still, in some degree, rewards 
For acts of service ? Can his love extend 
To hearts that own not him ? Will showers of grace, 
When in the sky no promise may be seen, 
Fall to refresh a parched and withered land ? 
Or shall the groaning Spirit cast her load 
At the Redeemer's feet ? " 
In rueful tone, 
With some impatience in his mien, he spake : 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Back to my mind rushed all that had been urged 
To calm the Sufferer when his story closed ; 
I looked for counsel as unbending now ; 
But a discriminating sympathy 
Stooped to this apt reply : — 
"As men from men 
Do, in the constitution of their souls, 
Differ, by mystery not to be explained ; 
And as we fall by various ways, and sink 
One deeper than another, self-condemned, 
Through manifold degrees of guilt and shame ; 
So manifold and various are the ways 
Of restoration, fashioned to the steps 
Of all infirmity, and tending all 
To the same point, attainable by all — 
Peace in ourselves, and union with our God. 
For you, assuredly, a hopeful road 
Lies open : we have heard from you a voice 
At every moment softened in its course 
By tenderness of heart ; have seen your eye, 
Even like an altar lit by fire from heaven, 
Kindle before us. — Your discourse this day, 
That, like the fabled Lethe, wished to flow 
In creeping sadness, through oblivious shades 
Of death and night, has caught at every turn 
The colours of the sun. Access for you 
Is yet preserved to principles of truth, 
Which the imaginative Will upholds 
In seats of wisdom, not to be approached 
By the inferior Faculty that moulds, 
With her minute and speculative pains, 
Opinion, ever changing ! 
I have seen 
A curious child, who dwelt upon a tract 
Of inland ground, applying to his ear 
The convolutions of a smooth-lipped shell ; 
To which, in silence hushed, his very soul 
Listened intensely ; and his countenance soon 
Brightened with joy; for from within were heard 
Murmurings, whereby the monitor expressed 
Mysterious union with its native sea. 
Even such a shell the universe itself 
Is to the ear of Faith ; and there are times, 
I doubt not, when to you it doth impart 
Authentic tidings of invisible things ; 
Of ebb and flow, and ever-during power ; 
And central peace, subsisting at the heart 
Of endless agitation. Here you stand, 
Adore, and worship, when you know it not ; 
Pious beyond the intention of your thought ; 
Devout above the meaning of your will. 
— Yes, you have felt, and may not cease to feel. 
The estate of man would be indeed forlorn 
If false conclusions of the reasoning power 

Made the eye blind, and closed the passages 
Through which the ear converses with the heart. 
Has not the soul, the being of your life, 
Received a shock of awful consciousness, 
In some calm season, when these lofty rocks 
At night's approach bring down the unclouded sky, 
To rest upon their circumambient walls ; 
A temple framing of dimensions vast, 
And yet not too enormous for the sound 
Of human anthems, — choral song, or burst 
Sublime of instrumental harmony, 
To glorify the Eternal ! What if these 
Did never break the stillness that prevails 
Here, — if the solemn nightingale be mute, 
And the soft woodlark here did never chant 
Her vespers, — Nature fails not to provide 
Impulse and utterance. The whispering air 
Sends inspiration from the shadowy heights, 
And blind recesses of the caverned rocks ; 
The little rills, and waters numberless, 
Inaudible by daylight, blend their notes 
With the loud streams : and often, at the hour 
When issue forth the first pale stars, is heard, 
Within the circuit of this fabric huge, 
One voice — the solitary raven, flying 
Athwart the concave of the dark blue dome, 
Unseen, perchance above all power of sight — 
An iron knell ! with echoes from afar 
Faint — and still fainter — as the cry, with which 
The wanderer accompanies her flight 
Through the calm region, fades upon the ear, 
Diminishing by distance till it seemed 
To expire ; yet from the abyss is caught again, 
And yet again recovered ! 
But descending 
From these imaginative heights, that yield 
Far-stretching views into eternity, 
Acknowledge that to Nature's humbler power 
Your cherished sullenness is forced to bend 
Even here, where her amenities are sown 
With sparing hand. Then trust yourself abroad 
To range her blooming bowers, and spacious fields, 
Where on the labours of the happy throng 
She smiles, including in her wide embrace 
City, and town, and tower, — and sea with ships 
Sprinkled ;— be our Companion while we track 
Her rivers populous with gliding life ; 
While, free as air, o'er printless sands we march, 
Or pierce the gloom of her majestic woods ; 
Roaming, or resting under grateful shade 
In peace and meditative cheerfulness ; 
Where living things, and things inanimate, 
Do speak, at Heaven's command, to eye and ear, 
And speak to social reason's inner sense, 

DESPONDENCY CORRECTED. 

 

With inarticulate language. 
For, the Man — 
Who, in this spirit, communes with the Forms 
Of nature, who with understanding heart 
Both knows and loves such objects as excite 
No morbid passions, no disquietude, 
No vengeance, and no hatred — needs must feel 
The joy of that pure principle of love 
So deeply, that, unsatisfied with aught 
Less pure and exquisite, he cannot choose 
i But seek for objects of a kindred love 
 In fellow-natures and a kindred joy. 
Accordingly he by degrees perceives 
His feelings of aversion softened down ; 
j A holy tenderness pervade his frame. 
J His sanity of reason not impaired, 
| Say rather, all his thoughts now flowing clear, 
.From a clear fountain flowing, he looks round 
And seeks for good ; and finds the good he seeks : 
Until abhorrence and contempt are things 
.He only knows by name ; and, if he hear, 
From other mouths, the language which they speak, 
He is compassionate ; and has no thought, 
No feeling, which can overcome his love. 
And further ; by contemplating these Forms 
In the relations which they bear to man, 
;,He shall discern, how, through the various means 
Which silently they yield, are multiplied 
The spiritual presences of absent things. 
'Trust me, that for the instructed, time will come 
When they shall meet no object but may teach 
iSome acceptable lesson to their minds 
Of human suffering, or of human j oy. 
o shall they learn, while all things speak of man, 
Their duties from all forms ; and general laws, 
And local accidents, shall tend alike 
To rouse, to urge ; and, with the will, confer 
The ability to spread the blessings wide 
f true philanthropy. The light of love 
i^ot failing, perseverance from their steps 
imparting not, for them shall be confirmed 
The glorious habit by which sense is made 
subservient still to moral purposes, 
\uxiliar to divine. That change shall clothe 
Che naked spirit, ceasing to deplore 
;?he burthen of existence. Science then 
shall be a precious visitant ; and then, 
ind only then, be worthy of her name : 
for then her heart shall kindle ; her dull eye, 
Dull and inanimate, no more shall hang 
Chained to its object in brute slavery ; 
])nt taught with patient interest to watch 
The processes of things, and serve the cause 

Of order and distinctness, not for this 
Shall it forget that its most noble use, 
Its most illustrious province, must be found 
In furnishing clear guidance, a support 
Not treacherous, to the mind's excursive power. 
— So build we up the Being that we are ; 
Thus deeply drinking-in the soul of things, 
We shall be wise perforce ; and, while inspired 
By choice, and conscious that the Will is free, 
Shall move unswerving, even as if impelled 
By strict necessity, along the path 
Of order and of good. Whate'er we see, 
Or feel, shall tend to quicken and refine ; 
Shall fix, in calmer seats of moral strength, 
Earthly desires ; and raise, to loftier heights 
Of divine love, our intellectual soul." 
Here closed the Sage that eloquent harangue, 
Poured forth with fervour in continuous stream, 
Such as, remote, mid savage wilderness, 
An Indian Chief discharges from his breast 
Into the hearing of assembled tribes, 
In open circle seated round, and hushed 
As the unbreathing air, when not a leaf 
Stirs in the mighty woods. — So did he speak : 
The words he uttered shall not pass away 
Dispersed, like music that the wind takes up 
By snatches, and lets fall, to be forgotten ; 
No — they sank into me, the bounteous gift 
Of one whom time and nature had made wise, 
Gracing his doctrine with authority 
Which hostile spirits silently allow ; 
Of one accustomed to desires that feed 
On fruitage gathered from the tree of life ; 
To hopes on knowledge and experience built ; 
Of one in whom persuasion and belief 
Had ripened into faith, and faith become 
A passionate intuition ; whence the Soul, 
Though bound to earth by ties of pity and love, 
From all injurious servitude was free. 
The Sun, before his place of rest were reached, 
Had yet to travel far, but unto us, 
To us who stood low in that hollow dell, 
He had become invisible, — a pomp 
Leaving behind of yellow radiance spread 
Over the mountain sides, in contrast bold 
With ample shadows, seemingly, no less 
Than those resplendent lights, his rich bequest ; 
A dispensation of his evening power. 
— Adown the path that from the glen had led 
The funeral train, the Shepherd and his Mate 
Were seen descending :— forth to greet them ran 
Our little Page : the rustic pair approach ; 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

And in the Matron's countenance may be read 
Plain indication that the words, which told 
How that neglected Pensioner was sent 
Before his time into a quiet grave, 
Had done to her humanity no wrong : 
But we are kindly welcomed — promptly served 
With ostentatious zeal. — Along the floor 

Of the small Cottage in the lonely Dell 
A grateful couch was spread for our repose ; 
Where, in the guise of mountaineers, we lay, 
Stretched upon fragrant heath, and lulled by soun 
Of far-off torrents charming the still night, 
And, to tired limbs and over-busy thoughts, 
Inviting sleep and soft forgetfuhiess. 

BOOK FIFTH. 

THE PASTOR. 
ARGUMENT. 
Farewell to the Valley— Reflections— A large and populous 
Vale described— The Pastor's Dwelling, and some 
account of him— Church and Monuments— The Solitary 
musing, and where— Roused— In the Churchyard the 
Solitary communicates the thoughts which had 
recently passed through his mind— Lofty tone of the 
Wanderer's discourse of yesterday adverted to— Rite 
of Baptism, and the professions accompanying it, 
contrasted with the real state of human life— Apology 
for the Rite— Inconsistency of the best men— Acknow- 
ledgment that practice falls far below the injunctions 
of duty as existing in the mind— General complaint of 
a falling-off in the value of life after the time of youth 
—Outward appearances of content and happiness in 
degree illusive— Pastor approaches— Appeal made to 
him— His answer— Wanderer in sympathy with him— 
Suggestion that the least ambitious enquirers may be 
most free from error— The Pastor is desired to give some 
portraits of the living or dead from his own observa- 
tion of life among these Mountains — and for what pur- 
pose—Pastor consents— Mountain cottage— Excellent 
qualities of its Inhabitants— Solitary expresses his 
pleasure ; but denies the praise of virtue to worth of 
this kind— Feelings of the Priest before he enters upon 
his account of persons interred in the Churchyard- 
Graves of unbaptized Infants— Funeral and sepulchral 
observances, whence— Ecclesiastical Establishments, 
whence derived — Profession of belief in the doctrine 
of Immortality. 
" Farewell, deep Valley, with thy one rude 
House, 
And its small lot of life-supporting fields, 
And guardian rocks ! — Farewell, attractive seat ! 
To the still influx of the morning light 
Open, and day's pure cheerfulness, but veiled 
From human observation, as if yet 
Primeval forests wrapped thee round with dark 
Impenetrable shade ; once more farewell, 
Majestic circuit, beautiful abyss, 
By Nature destined from the birth of things 
For quietness profound ! " 
Upon the side 

Of that brown ridge, sole outlet of the vale 
Which foot of boldest stranger would attempt, 
Lingering behind my comrades, thus I breathed 
A parting tribute to a spot that seemed 
Like the fixed centre of a troubled world. 
Again I halted with reverted eyes ; 
The chain that would not slacken, was at length 
Snapt, — and, pursuing leisurely my way, 
How vain, thought I, is it by change of place 
To seek that comfort which the mind denies ; 
Yet trial and temptation oft are shunned 
Wisely ; and by such tenure do we hold, 
Frail life's possessions, that even they whose fate 
Yields no peculiar reason of complaint 
Might, by the promise that is here, be won 
To steal from active duties, and embrace 
Obscurity, and undisturbed repose. 
— Knowledge, methinks, in these disordered times, ' 
Should be allowed a privilege to have 
Her anchorites, like piety of old ; 
Men, who, from faction sacred, and unstained 
By war, might, if so minded, turn aside 
Uncensured, and subsist, a scattered few 
Living to God and nature, and content 
With that communion. Consecrated be 
The spots where such abide ! But happier stil! 
The Man, whom, furthermore, a hope attends 
That meditation and research may guide 
His privacy to principles and powers 
Discovered or invented ; or set forth, 
Through his acquaintance with the ways of truth, 
In lucid order ; so that, when his course 
Is run, some faithful eulogist may say, 
He sought not praise, and praise did overlook 
His unobtrusive merit ; but his life, 
Sweet to himself, was exercised in good 
That shall survive his name and memory. 
Acknowledgments of gratitude sincere 
Accompanied these musings ; fervent thanks 

THE PASTOR. 

 

For my own peaceful lot and happy choice ; 
A choice that from the passions of the world 
Withdrew, and fixed me in a still retreat ; 
Sheltered, but not to social duties lost, 
Secluded, but not buried ; and with song 
Cheering my days, and with industrious thought ; 
With the ever-welcome company of books ; 
With virtuous friendship's soul-sustaining aid, 
And with the blessings of domestic love. 
Thus occupied in mind I paced along, 
Following the rugged road, by sledge or wheel 
Worn in the moorland, till I overtook 
My two Associates, in the morning sunshine 
Halting together on a rocky knoll, 
Whence the bare road descended rapidly 
To the green meadows of another vale. 
Here did our pensive Host put forth his hand 
In sign of farewell. " Nay," the old Man said, 
" The fragrant air its coolness still retains ; 
The herds and flocks are yet abroad to crop 
The dewy grass ; you cannot leave us now, 
We must not part at this inviting hour." 
He yielded, though reluctant ; for his mind 
: Instinctively disposed him to retire 
To his own covert ; as a billow, heaved 
Upon the beach, rolls back into the sea. 
' — So we descend : and winding round a rock 
Attain a point that showed the valley — stretched 
. In length before us ; and, not distant far, 
• Upon a rising ground a grey church-tower, 
Whose battlements were screened by tufted trees. 
' And towards a crystal Mere, that lay beyond 
Among steep hills and woods embosomed, flowed 
A copious stream with boldly-winding course ; 
Here traceable, there hidden — there again 
To sight restored, and glittering in the sun. 
On the stream's bank, and every where, appeared 
Fair dwellings, single, or in social knots ; 
Some scattered o'er the level, others perched 
On the hill sides, a cheerful quiet scene, 
Now in its morning purity arrayed. 
" As 'mid some happy valley of the Alps," 
Said I, " once happy, ere tyrannic power, 
Wantonly breaking in upon the Swiss, 
Destroyed their unoffending commonwealth, 
A popular equality reigns here, 
Save for yon stately House beneath whose roof 
A rural lord might dwell." — " No feudal pomp, 
Or power," replied the Wanderer, " to that House 
Belongs, but there in his allotted Home 
Abides, from year to year, a genuine Priest, 

The shepherd of his flock ; or, as a king 
Is styled, when most affectionately praised, 
The father of his people. Such is' he ; 
And rich and poor, and young and old, rejoice 
Under his spiritual sway. He hath vouchsafed 
To me some portion of a kind regard ; 
And something also of his inner mind 
Hath he imparted — but I speak of him 
As he is known to all. 
The calm delights 
Of unambitious piety he chose, 
And learning's solid dignity ; though born 
Of knightly race, nor wanting powerful friends. 
Hither, in prime of manhood, he withdrew 
From academic bowers. He loved the spot — 
Who does not love his native soil ? — he prized 
The ancient rural character, composed 
Of simple manners, feelings unsupprest 
And undisguised, and strong and serious thought ; 
A character reflected in himself, 
With such embellishment as well beseems 
His rank and sacred function. This deep vale 
Winds far in reaches hidden from our sight, 
And one a turreted manorial hall 
Adorns, in which the good Man's ancestors 
Have dwelt through ages — Patrons of this Cure. 
To them, and to his own judicious pains, 
The Vicar's dwelling, and the whole domain, 
Owes that presiding aspect which might well 
Attract your notice ; statelier than could else 
Have been bestowed, through course of common 
chance, 
On an unwealthy mountain Benefice." 
This said, oft pausing, we pursued our way ; 
Nor reached the village-churchyard till the sun 
Travelling at steadier pace than ours, had risen 
Above the summits of the highest hills, 
And round our path darted oppressive beams. 
As chanced, the portals of the sacred Pile 
Stood open ; and we entered. On my frame, 
At such transition from the fervid air, 
A grateful coolness fell, that seemed to strike 
The heart, in concert with that temperate awe 
And natural reverence which the place inspired. 
Not raised in nice proportions was the pile, 
But large and massy ; for duration built ; 
With pillars crowded, and the roof upheld 
By naked rafters intricately crossed, 
Like leafless underboughs, in some thick wood, 
All withered by the depth of shade above. 
Admonitory texts inscribed the walls, 
Each, in its ornamental scroll, enclosed ; 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Each also crowned with winged heads — a pair 
Of rudely -painted Cherubim. The floor 
Of nave and aisle, in unpretending guise, 
Was occupied by oaken benches ranged 
In seemly rows ; the chancel only showed 
Some vain distinctions, marks of earthly state 
By immemorial privilege allowed ; 
Though with the Encincture's special sanctity 
But ill according. An heraldic shield, 
Varying its tincture with the changeful light, 
Imbued the altar- window ; fixed aloft 
A faded hatchment hung, and one by time 
Yet undiscoloured. A capacious pew 
Of sculptured oak stood here, with drapery lined ; 
And marble monuments were here displayed 
Thronging the walls ; and on the floor beneath 
Sepulchral stones appeared, with emblems graven 
And foot-worn ejritaphs, and some with small 
And shining effigies of brass inlaid. 
The tribute by these various records claimed, 
Duly we paid, each after each, and read 
The ordinary chronicle of birth, 
Office, alliance, and promotion — all 
Ending in dust ; of upright magistrates, 
Grave doctors strenuous for the mother-church, 
And uncorrupted senators, alike 
To king and people true. A brazen plate, 
Not easily deciphered, told of one 
Whose course of earthly honour was begun 
In quality of page among the train 
Of the eighth Henry, when he crossed the seas 
His royal state to show, and prove his strength 
In tournament, upon the fields of France. 
Another tablet registered the death, 
And praised the gallant bearing, of a Knight 
Tried in the sea-fights of the second Charles. 
Near this brave Knight his Father lay entombed ; 
And, to the silent language giving voice, 
I read, — how in his manhood's earlier day 
He, 'mid the afflictions of intestine war 
And rightful government subverted, found 
One only solace — that he had espoused 
A virtuous Lady tenderly beloved 
For her benign perfections ; and yet more 
Endeared to him, for this, that, in her state 
Of wedlock richly crowned with Heaven's regard, 
She with a numerous issue filled his house, 
Who throve, like plants, uninjured by the storm 
That laid their country waste. No need to speak 
Of less particular notices assigned 
To Youth or Maiden gone before their time, 
And Matrons and unwedded Sisters old ; 
Whose charity and goodness were rehearsed 

In modest panegyric. 
" These dim lines, 
What would they tell ?" said I, — but, from the task 
Of puzzling out that faded narrative, 
With whisper soft my venerable Friend 
Called me ; and, looking down the darksome aisle, 
I saw the Tenant of the lonely vale 
Standing apart ; with curved arm reclined 
On the baptismal font ; his pallid face 
Upturned, as if his mind were rapt, or lost 
In some abstraction ; — gracefully he stood, 
The semblance bearing of a sculptured form 
That leans upon a monumental urn 
In peace, from morn to night, from year to year. 
Him from that posture did the Sexton rouse ; 
Who entered, humming carelessly a tune, 
Continuation haply of the notes 
That had beguiled the work from which he caine, 
With spade and mattock o'er his shoulder hung ; 
To be deposited, for future need, 
In their appointed place. The pale Recluse 
Withdrew ; and straight we followed, — to a spot 
Where sun and shade were intermixed ; for there 
A broad oak, stretching forth its leafy arms 
From an adjoining pasture, overhung 
Small space of that green churchyard with a light 
And pleasant awning. On the moss-grown wall 
My ancient Friend and I together took 
Our seats ; and thus the Solitary spake, 
Standing before us : — 
" Did you note the mien 
Of that self-solaced, easy -hearted churl, 
Death's hireling, who scoops out his neighbour's 
grave, 
Or wraps an old acquaintance up in clay, 
All unconcerned as he would bind a sheaf, 
Or plant a tree. And did you hear his voice ? 
I was abruptly summoned by the sound 
From some affecting images and thoughts, 
Which then were silent ; but crave utterance now. 
Much," he continued, with dejected look, 
"Much, yesterday, was said in glowing phrase 
Of our sublime dependencies, and hopes 
For future states of being ; and the wings 
Of speculation, joyfully outspread, 
Hovered above our destiny on earth : 
But stoop, and place the prospect of the soul 
In sober contrast with reality, 
And man's substantial life. If this mute earth 
Of what it holds could speak, and every grave 
Were as a volume, shut, yet capable 
Of yielding its contents to eye and ear, 

THE PASTOR. 

$ 


We should recoil, stricken with sorrow and shame, 
To see disclosed, by such dread proof, how ill 
That which is done accords with what is known 
To reason, and by conscience is enjoined ; 
How idly, how perversely, life's whole course, 
To this conclusion, deviates from the line, 
Or of the end stops short, proposed to all 
At her aspiring outset. 
Mark the babe 
Not long accustomed to this breathing world ; 
One that hath barely learned to shape a smile, 
Though yet irrational of soul, to grasp 
With tiny finger — to let fall a tear ; 
And, as the heavy cloud of sleep dissolves, 
To stretch his limbs, bemocking, as might seem, 
The outward functions of intelligent man ; 
A grave proficient in amusive feats 
Of puppetry, that from the lap declare 
His expectations, and announce his claims 
To that inheritance which millions rue 
That they were ever born to ! In due time 
A day of solemn ceremonial comes ; 
When they, who for this Minor hold in trust 
Rights that transcend the loftiest heritage 
Of mere humanity, present their Charge, 
For this occasion daintily adorned, 
At the baptismal font. And when the pure 
And consecrating element hath cleansed 
The original stain, the child is there received 
Into the second ark, Christ's church, with trust 
That he, from wrath redeemed, therein shall float 
Over the billows of this troublesome world 
To the fair land of everlasting life. 
Corrupt affections, covetous desires, 
 Are all renounced ; high as the thought of man 
Can carry virtue, virtue is professed ; 
A dedication made, a promise given 
For due provision to control and guide, 
' And unremitting progress to ensure 
In holiness and truth." 
" You cannot blame," 
Here interposing fervently I said, 
;" Rites which attest that Man by nature lies 
Bedded for good and evil in a gulf 
Fearfully low ; nor will your judgment scorn 
Those services, whereby attempt is made 
To lift the creature toward that eminence 
On which, now fallen, erewhile in majesty 
He stood ; or if not so, whose top serene 
lAt least he feels 'tis given him to descry ; 
iNot without aspirations, evermore 
'Returning, and injunctions from within 
Doubt to cast off and weariness ; in trust 
,That what the Soul perceives, if glory lost, 

May be, through pains and persevering hope, 
Recovered ; or, if hitherto unknown, 
Lies within reach, and one day shall be gained." 
" I blame them not," he calmly answered — "no ; 
The outward ritual and established forms 
With which communities of men invest 
These inward feelings, and the aspiring vows 
To which the lips give public utterance 
Are both a natural process; and by me 
Shall pass uncensured ; though the issue prove, 
Bringing from age to age its own reproach, 
Incongruous, impotent, and blank. — But, oh ! 
If to be weak is to be wretched — miserable, 
As the lost Angel by a human voice 
Hath mournfully pronounced, then, in my mind, 
Far better not to move at all than move 
By impulse sent from such illusive power,— 
That finds and cannot fasten down ; that grasps 
And is rejoiced, and loses while it grasps ; 
That tempts, emboldens — for a time sustains, 
And then betrays ; accuses and inflicts 
Remorseless punishment ; and so retreads 
The inevitable circle : better far 
Than this, to graze the herb in thoughtless peace, 
By foresight or remembrance, undisturbed ! 
Philosophy ! and thou more vaunted name 
Religion ! with thy statelier retinue, 
Faith, Hope, and Charity — from the visible world 
Choose for your emblems whatsoe'er ye find 
Of safest guidance or of firmest trust — 
The torch, the star, the anchor ; nor except 
The cross itself, at whose unconscious feet 
The generations of mankind have knelt 
Ruefully seized, and shedding bitter tears, 
And through that conflict seeking rest^of you, 
High-titled Powers, am I constrained to ask, 
Here standing, with the unvoyageable sky 
In faint reflection of infinitude 
Stretched overhead, and at my pensive feet 
A subterraneous magazine of bones, 
In whose dark vaults my own shall soon be laid, 
Where are your triumphs? your dominion where? 
And in what age admitted and confirmed ? 
— Not for a happy land do I enquire, 
Island or grove, that hides a blessed few 
Who, with obedience willing and sincere, 
To your serene authorities conform ; 
But whom, I ask, of individual Souls, 
Have ye withdrawn from passion's crooked ways, 
Inspired, and thoroughly fortified?— If the heart 
Could be inspected to its inmost folds 
By sight undazzled with the glare of praise, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Who shall he named — in the resplendent line 
Of sages, martyrs, confessors — the man 
Whom the best might of faith, wherever fix'd, 
For one day's little compass, has preserved 
From painful and discreditable shocks 
Of contradiction, from some vague desire 
Culpably cherished, or corrupt relapse 
To some unsanctioned fear?" 
" If this be so, 
And Man," said I, " be in his noblest shape 
Thus pitiably infirm ; then, he who made, 
And who shall judge the creature, will forgive. 
— Yet, in its general tenor, your complaint 
Is all too true ; and surely not misplaced : 
For, from this pregnant spot of ground, such 
thoughts 
Rise to the notice of a serious mind 
By natural exhalation. With the dead 
In their repose, the living in their mirth, 
Who can reflect, unmoved, upon the round 
Of smooth and solemnized complacencies, 
By which, on Christian lands, from age to age 
Profession mocks performance. Earth is sick, 
And Heaven is weary, of the hollow words 
Which States and Kingdoms utter when they talk 
Of truth and justice. Turn to private life 
And social neighbourhood ; look we to ourselves ; 
A light of duty shines on every day 
For all ; and yet how few are warmed or cheered ! 
How few who mingle with their fellow-men 
And still remain self-governed, and apart, 
Like this our honoured Friend ; and thence acquire 
Right to expect his vigorous decline, 
That promises to the end a blest old age ! " 
" Yet," with a smile of triumph thus exclaimed 
The Solitary, " in the life of man, 
If to the poetry of common speech 
Faith may be given, we see as in a glass 
A true reflection of the circling year, 
With all its seasons. Grant that Spring is there, 
In spite of many a rough untoward blast, 
Hopeful and promising with buds and flowers ; 
Yet where is glowing Summer's long rich day, 
That ought to follow faithfully expressed ? 
And mellow Autumn, charged with bounteous fruit. 
Where is she imaged ? hi what favoured clime 
Her lavish pomp, and ripe magnificence ? 
— Yet, while the better part is missed, the worse 
In man's autumnal season is set forth 
With a resemblance not to be denied, 
And that contents him ; bowers that hear no more 
The voice of gladness, less and less supply 
Of outward sunshine and internal warmth ; 

And, with this change, sharp air and falling 
Foretelling aged Winter's desolate sway. 

How gay the habitations that bedeck 
This fertile valley ! Not a house but seems 
To give assurance of content within ; 
Embosomed happiness, and placid love ; 
As if the sunshine of the day were met 
With answering brightness in the hearts of all 
Who walk this favoured ground. But chance- 
regards, 
And notice forced upon incurious ears ; 
These, if these only, acting in despite 
Of the encomiums by my Friend pronounced 
On humble life, forbid the judging mind 
To trust the smiling aspect of this fair 
And noiseless commonwealth. The simple race 
Of mountaineers (by nature's self removed 
From foul temptations, and by constant care 
Of a good shepherd tended as themselves 
Do tend their flocks) partake man's general lot 
With little mitigation. They escape, 
Perchance, the heavier woes of guilt ; feel not 
The tedium of fantastic idleness : 
Yet life, as with the multitude, with them 
Is fashioned like an ill-constructed tale ; 
That on the outset wastes its gay desires, 
Its fair adventures, its enlivening hopes, 
And pleasant interests — for the sequel leaving 
Old tilings repeated with diminished grace; 
And all the laboured novelties at best 
Imperfect substitutes, whose use and power 
Evince the want and weakness whence they spring." 
While in this serious mood we held discourse, 
The reverend Pastor toward the church-yard gate 
Approached ; and, with a mild respectful air 
Of native cordiality, our Friend 
Advanced to greet him. With a gracious mien 
Was he received, and mutual joy prevailed. 
Awhile they stood in conference, and I guess 
That he, who now upon the mossy wall 
Sate by my side, had vanished, if a wish 
Could have transferred him to the flying clouds, 
Or the least penetrable hiding-place 
In his own valley's rocky guardianship. 
— For me, I looked upon the pair, well pleased : 
Nature had framed themboth, and both were marked 
By circumstance, with intermixture fine 
Of contrast and resemblance. To an oak 
Hardy and grand, a weather-beaten oak, 
Fresh in the strength and majesty of age, 
One might be likened : flourishing appeared, 
Though somewhat past the fulness of his prime, 

THE PASTOR. 

 

The other — like a stately sycamore, 
I That spreads, in gentle pomp, its honied shade. 
A general greeting was exchanged ; and soon 
The Pastor learned that his approach had given 
A welcome interruption to discourse 
; Grave, and in truth too often sad. — "Is Man 
A child of hope ? Do generations press 
On generations, without progress made ? 
| Halts the individual, ere his hairs be grey, 
| Perforce ? Are we a creature in whom good 
Preponderates, or evil ? Doth the will 
Acknowledge reason's law ? A living power 
j Is virtue, or no better than a name, 
i Fleeting as health or beauty, and unsound ? 
! So that the only substance which remains, 
(For thus the tenor of complaint hath run) 
' Among so many shadows, are the pains 
And penalties of miserable life, 
. Doomed to decay, and then expire in dust ! 
' — Our cogitations this way have been drawn, 
i These are the points," the Wanderer said, "on which 
I Our inquest turns. — Accord, good Sir ! the light 
i Of your experience to dispel this gloom : 
\ By your persuasive wisdom shall the heart 
'That frets, or languishes, be stilled and cheered." 
"Our nature," said the Priest, in mild reply, 
•"Angels may weigh and fathom : they perceive, 
With undistempered and unclouded spirit, 
The object as it is ; but, for ourselves, 
i That speculative height we may not reach. 
iThe good and evil are our own ; and we 
Are that which we would contemplate from far. 
'Knowledge, for us, is difficult to gain — 
Is difficult to gain, and hard to keep — 
As virtue's self; like virtue is beset 
With snares ; tried, tempted, subject to decay. 
jLove, admiration, fear, desire, and hate, 
IBlind were we without these : through these alone 
Are capable to notice or discern 
Or to record ; we judge, but cannot be 
(Indifferent judges. 'Spite of proudest boast, 
/Reason, best reason, is to imperfect man 
jAn effort only, and a noble aim ; 
A crown, an attribute of sovereign power, 
■Still to be courted — never to be won. 
—Look forth, or each man dive into himself ; 
iWhat sees he but a creature too perturbed ; 
Irhat is transported to excess ; that yearns, 
IRegrets, or trembles, wrongly, or too much ; 
Hopes rashly, in disgust as rash recoils ; 
'Battens on spleen, or moulders in despair ? 
jrhus comprehension fails, and truth is missed ; 

Thus darkness and delusion round our path 
Spread, from disease, whose subtle injury lurks 
Within the very faculty of sight. 
Yet for the general purposes of faith 
In Providence, for solace and support, 
We may not doubt that who can best subject 
The will to reason's law, can strictliest live 
And act in that obedience, he shall gain 
The clearest apprehension of those truths, 
Which unassisted reason's utmost power 
Is too infirm to reach. But, waiving this, 
And our regards confining within bounds 
Of less exalted consciousness, through which 
The very multitude are free to range, 
We safely may affirm that human life 
Is either fair and tempting, a soft scene 
Grateful to sight, refreshing to the soul, 
Or a forbidden tract of cheerless view ; 
Even as the same is looked at, or approached. 
Thus, when in changeful April fields are white 
With new-fallen snow, if from the sullen north 
Your walk conduct you hither, ere the sun 
Hath gained his noontide height, this churchyard, 
filled 
With mounds transversely lying side by side 
From east to west, before you will appear 
An unillumined, blank, and dreary, plain, 
With more than wintry cheerlessness and gloom 
Saddening the heart. Go forward, and look back ; 
Look, from the quarter whence the lord of light, 
Of life, of love, and gladness doth dispense 
His beams ; which, unexcluded in their fall, 
Upon the southern side of every grave 
Have gently exercised a melting power ; 
Tlien will a vernal prospect greet your eye, 
All fresh and beautiful, and green and bright, 
Hopeful and cheerful : — vanished is the pall 
That overspread and chilled the sacred turf, 
Vam'shed or hidden ; and the whole domain, 
To some, too lightly minded, might appear 
A meadow carpet for the dancing hours. 
— This contrast, not unsuitable to life, 
Is to that other state more apposite, 
Death and its two-fold aspect ! wintry — one, 
Cold, sullen, blank, from hope and joy shut out ; 
The other, which the ray divine hath touched, 
Replete with vivid promise, bright as spring." 
" We see, then, as we feel," the Wanderer thus 
With a complacent animation spake, 
" And in your judgment, Sir ! the mind's repose 
On evidence is not to be ensured 
By act of naked reason. Moral truth 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Is no mechanic structure, built by rule ; 
And which, once built, retains a stedfast shape 
And undisturbed proportions ; but a thing 
Subject, you deem, to vital accidents ; 
And, like the water-lily, lives and thrives, 
Whose root is fixed in stable earth, whose head 
Floats on the tossing waves. With joy sincere 
I re-salute these sentiments confirmed 
By your authority. But how acquire 
The inward principle that gives effect 
To outward argument ; the passive will 
Meek to admit ; the active energy, 
Strong and unbounded to embrace, and firm 
To keep and cherish ? how shall man unite 
With self-forgetting tenderness of heart 
An earth-despising dignity of soul ? 
Wise in that union, and without it blind ! " 
" The way," said I, u to court, if not obtain 
The ingenuous mind, apt to be set aright ; 
This, in the lonely dell discoursing, you 
Declared at large ; and by what exercise 
From visible nature, or the inner self 
Power may be trained, and renovation brought 
To those who need the gift. But, after all, 
Is aught so certain as that man is doomed 
To breathe beneath a vault of ignorance ? 
The natural roof of that dark house in which 
His soul is pent ! How little can be known — 
This is the wise man's sigh ; how far we err — 
This is the good man's not unfrequent pang ! 
And they perhaps err least, the lowly class 
Whom a benign necessity compels 
To follow reason's least ambitious course ; 
Such do I mean who, unperplexed by doubt, 
And unincited by a wish to look 
Into high objects farther than they may, 
Pace to and fro, from morn till even-tide, 
The narrow avenue of daily toil 
For daily bread." 
" Yes," buoyantly exclaimed 
The pale Recluse — " praise to the sturdy plough, 
And patient spade ; praise to the simple crook, 
And ponderous loom — resounding while it holds 
Body and mind in one captivity ; 
And let the light mechanic tool be hailed 
With honour ; which, encasing by the power 
Of long companionship, the artist's hand, 
Cuts off that hand, with all its world of nerves, 
From a too busy commerce with the heart ! 
— Inglorious implements of craft and toil, 
Both ye that shape and build, and ye that force, 
By slow solicitation, earth to yield 
Her annual bounty, sparingly dealt forth 

With wise reluctance ; you would I extol, 
Not for gross good alone which ye produce, 
But for the impertinent and ceaseless strife 
Of proofs and reasons ye preclude — in those 
Who to your dull society are born, 
And with their humble birthright rest content. 
— Would I had ne'er renounced it ! " 
A slight flush 
Of moral anger previously had tinged 
The old Man's cheek ; but, at this closing turn 
Of self-reproach, it passed away. Said he, 
" That which we feel we utter ; as we think 
So have we argued ; reaping for our pains 
No visible recompense. For our relief 
You," to the Pastor turning thus he spake, 
" Have kindly interposed. May I entreat 
Your further help ? The mine of real life 
Dig for us ; and present us, in the shape 
Of virgin ore, that gold which we, by pains 
Fruitless as those of aery alchemists, 
Seek from the torturing crucible. There lies 
Around us a domain where you have long 
Watched both the outward course and inner 
heart : 
Give us, for our abstractions, solid facts ; 
For our disputes, plain pictures. Say what man 
He is who cultivates yon hanging field ; 
What qualities of mind she bears, who comes, 
For morn and evening service, with her pail, 
To that green pasture ; place before our sight 
The family who dwell within yon house 
Fenced round with glittering laurel ; or in that 
Below, from which the curling smoke ascends. 
Or rather, as we stand on holy earth, 
And have the dead around us, take from them 
Your instances ; for they are both best known, 
And by frail man most equitably judged. 
Epitomise the life ; pronounce, you can, 
Authentic epitaphs on some of these 
Who, from their lowly mansions hither brought, 
Beneath this turf lie mouldering at our feet : 
So, by your records, may our doubts be solved ; 
And so, not searching higher, we may learn 
To prize the breath we share with human kind ; 
And look upon the dust of man with awe." 
The Priest replied — " An office you impose 
For which peculiar requisites are mine ; 
Yet much, I feel, is wanting — else the task- 
Would be most grateful. True indeed it is 
That they whom death has hidden from our sight 
Are worthiest of the mind's regard ; with these 
The future cannot contradict the past : 
Mortality's last exercise and proof 

THE PASTOR. 

 

Is undergone ; the transit made that shows 
The very Soul, revealed as she departs. 
Yet, on your first suggestion, will I give, 
Ere we descend into these silent vaults, 
One picture from the living. 
You behold, 
High on the breast of yon dark mountain, dark 
With stony barrenness, a shining speck 
Bright as a sunbeam sleeping till a shower 
Brush it away, or cloud pass over it ; 
I And such it might be deemed — a sleeping sunbeam ; 
! But 'tis a plot of cultivated ground, 
Cut off, an island in the dusky waste ; 
: And that attractive brightness is its own. 
I The lofty site, by nature framed to tempt 
Amid a wilderness of rocks and stones 
i The tiller's hand, a hermit might have chosen, 
, For opportunity presented, thence 
Far forth to send his wandering eye o'er land 
And ocean, and look down upon the works, 
The habitations, and the ways of men, 
Himself unseen ! But no tradition tells 
| That ever hermit dipped his maple dish 
' In the sweet spring that lurks 'mid yon green fields ; 
: And no such visionary views belong 
\ To those who occupy and till the ground, 
! High on that mountain where they long have dwelt 
I A wedded pair in childless solitude. 
' A house of stones collected on the spot, 
[ By rude hands built, with rocky knolls in front, 
! Backed also by a ledge of rock, whose crest 
Of birch-trees waves over the chimney top ; 
| A rough abode — in colour, shape, and size, 
' Such as in unsafe times of border-war 
j Might have been wished for and contrived, to elude 
The eye of roving plunderer — for their need 
' Suffices ; and unshaken bears the assault 
i Of their most dreaded foe, the strong South-west 
t In anger blowing from the distant sea. 
! — Alone within her solitary hut ; 
i There, or within the compass of her fields, 
At any moment may the Dame be found, 
True as the stock-dove to her shallow nest 
i And to the grove that holds it. She beguiles 
I By intermingled work of house and field 
The summer's day, and winter's ; with success 
 Not equal, but sufficient to maintain, 
< Even at the worst, a smooth stream of content, 
Until the expected hour at which her Mate 
 From the far-distant quarry's vault returns ; 
I And by his converse crowns a silent day 
I With evening cheerfulness. In powers of mind, 
| In scale of culture, few among my flock 
J Hold lower rank than this sequestered pair : 

But true humility descends from heaven ; 
And that best gift of heaven hath fallen on them ; 
Abundant recompense for every want. 
— Stoop from your height, ye proud, and copy these ! 
Who, in their noiseless dwelling-place, can hear 
The voice of wisdom whispering scripture texts 
For the mind's government, or temper's peace ; 
And recommending for their mutual need, 
Forgiveness, patience, hope, and charity !" 
" Much was I pleased," the grey-haired Wanderer 
said, 
" When to those shining fields our notice first 
You turned ; and yet more pleased have from your 
lips 
Gathered this fair report of them who dwell 
In that retirement ; whither, by such course 
Of evil hap and good as oft awaits 
A tired way-faring man, once / was brought 
While traversing alone yon mountain pass. 
Dark on my road the autumnal evening fell, 
And night succeeded with unusual gloom, 
So hazardous that feet and hands became 
Guides better than mine eyes— until a light 
High in the gloom appeared, too high, methought, 
For human habitation ; but I longed 
To reach it, destitute of other hope. 
I looked with steadiness as sailors look 
On the north star, or watch-tower's distant lamp, 
And saw the light — now fixed — and shifting now — 
Not like a dancing meteor, but in line 
Of never- varying motion, to and fro. 
It is no night-fire of the naked hills, 
Thought I — some friendly covert must be near. 
With this persuasion thitherward my steps 
I turn, and reach at last the guiding light ; 
Joy to myself ! but to the heart of her 
Who there was standing on the open hill, 
(The same kind Matron whom your tongue hath 
praised) 
Alarm and disappointment ! The alarm 
Ceased, when she learned through what mishap I 
came, 
And by what help had gained those distant fields. 
Drawn from her cottage, on that aery height, 
Bearing a lantern in her hand she stood, 
Or paced the ground — to guide her Husband home, 
By that unwearied signal, kenned afar ; 
An anxious duty ! which the lofty site, 
Traversed but by a few irregular paths, 
Imposes, whensoe'er untoward chance 
Detains him after his accustomed hour 
Till night lies black upon the ground. ' But come, 
Come,' said the Matron, ' to our poor abode ; 
p p 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Those dark rocks hide it !' Entering, I beheld 
A blazing fire — beside a cleanly hearth 
Sate down ; and to her office, with leave asked, 
The Dame returned. 
Or ere that glowing pile 
Of mountain turf required the builder's hand 
Its wasted splendour to repair, the door 
Opened, and she re-entered with glad looks, 
Her Helpmate following. Hospitable fare, 
Frank conversation, made the evening's treat : 
Need a bewildered traveller wish for more ? 
But more was given ; I studied as we sate 
By the bright fire, the good Man's form, and face 
Not less than beautiful ; an open brow 
Of undisturbed humanity ; a cheek 
Suffused with something of a feminine hue ; 
Eyes beaming courtesy and mild regard ; 
But, in the quicker turns of the discourse, 
Expression slowly varying, that evinced 
A tardy apprehension. From a fount 
Lost, thought I, in the obscurities of time, 
But honoured once, those features and that mien 
May have descended, though I see them here. 
In such a man, so gentle and subdued, 
Withal so graceful in his gentleness, 
A race illustrious for heroic deeds, 
Humbled, but not degraded, may expire. 
This pleasing fancy (cherished and upheld 
By sundry recollections of such fall 
From high to low, ascent from low to high, 
As books record, and even the careless mind 
Cannot but notice among men and things) 
Went with me to the place of my repose. 
Roused by the crowing cock at dawn of day, 
I yet had risen too late to interchange 
A morning salutation with my Host, 
Gone forth already to the far-off seat 
Of his day's work. ' Three dark mid-winter 
months 
' Pass,' said the Matron, ' and I never see, 
' Save when the sabbath brings its kind release, 
i My Helpmate's face by light of day. He quits 
' His door in darkness, nor till dusk returns. 
' And, through Heaven's blessing, thus we gain 
the bread 
' For which we pray ; and for the wants provide 
' Of sickness, accident, and helpless age. 
' Companions have I many ; many friends, 
' Dependants, comforters — my wheel, my fire, 
' All day the house-clock ticking in mine ear, 
' The cackling hen, the tender chicken brood, 
' And the wild birds that gather round my porch. 
' This honest sheep-dog's countenance I read ; 


' With him can talk ; nor blush to waste a word 
' On creatures less intelligent and shrewd. 
' And if the blustering wind that drives the clouds 
' Care not for me, he lingers round my door, 
' And makes me pastime when our tempers suit ; — 
' But, above all, my thoughts are my support, 
'My comfort: — would that they were of ten er fixed 
' On what, for guidance in the way that leads 
' To heaven, I know, by my Redeemer taught.' 
The Matron ended — nor could I forbear 
To exclaim — ' happy ! yielding to the law 
Of these privations, richer in the main ! — 
While thankless thousands are opprest and clogged 
By ease and leisure ; by the very wealth 
And pride of opportunity made poor ; 
While tens of thousands falter in their path, 
And sink, through utter want of cheering light ; 
For you the hours of labour do not flag ; 
For you each evening hath its shining star, 
And every sabbath-day its golden sun.' " 
u Yes ! " said the Solitary with a smile 
That seemed to break from an expanding heart, 
" The untutored bird may found, and so construct, 
And with such soft materials line, her nest 
Fixed in the centre of a prickly brake, 
That the thorns wound her not ; they only guard. 
Powers not unjustly likened to those gifts 
Of happy instinct which the woodland bird 
Shares with her species, nature's grace sometimes 
Upon the individual doth confer, 
Among her higher creatures born and trained 
To use of reason. And, I own that, tired 
Of the ostentatious world — a swelling stage 
With empty actions and vain passions stuffed, 
And from the private struggles of mankind 
Hoping far less than I could wish to hope, 
Far less than once I trusted and believed — 
I love to hear of those, who, not contending 
Nor summoned to contend for virtue's prize, 
Miss not the humbler good at which they aim, 
Blest with a kindly faculty to blunt 
The edge of adverse circumstance, and turn 
Into their contraries the petty plagues 
And hindrances with which they stand beset. 
In early youth, among my native hills, 
I knew a Scottish Peasant who possessed 
A few small crofts of stone-encumbered ground ; 
Masses of every shape and size, that lay 
Scattered about under the mouldering walls 
Of a rough precipice ; and some, apart, 
In quarters unobnoxious to such chance, 
As if the moon had showered them down in spite. 
But he repined not. Though the plough was seared 

THE PASTOR. 

 

By these obstructions, ' round the shady stones 
A fertilising moisture,' said the Swain, 
c Gathers, and is preserved ; and feeding dews 
; 'And damps, through all the droughty summer 
day 
' From out their substance issuing, maintain 
< Herbage that never fails : no grass springs up 
■ ' So green, so fresh, so plentiful, as mine ! ' 
But thinly sown these natures ; rare, at least, 
The mutual aptitude of seed and soil 
! That yields such kindly product. He, whose bed 
' Perhaps yon loose sods cover, the poor Pensioner 
Brought yesterday from our sequestered dell 
Here to lie down in lasting quiet, he, 
i If living now, could otherwise report 
Of rustic loneliness : that grey-haired Orphan — 
So call him, for humanity to him 
■ No parent was — feelingly could have told, 
: In life, in death, what solitude can breed 
Of selfishness, and cruelty, and vice ; 
, Or, if it breed not, hath not power to cure. 
! — But your compliance, Sir ! with our request 
My words too long have hindered." 
Undeterred, 
Perhaps incited rather, by these shocks, 
', In no ungracious opposition, given 
To the confiding spirit of his own 
; Experienced faith, the reverend Pastor said, 
Around him looking ; " Where shall I begin ? 
! Who shall be first selected from my flock 
! Gathered together in their peaceful fold ? " 
He paused — and having lifted up his eyes 
| To the pure heaven, he cast them down again 
' Upon the earth beneath his feet ; and spake : — 
 To a mysteriously-united pair 
' This place is consecrate ; to Death and Life, 
And to the best affections that proceed 
, From their conjunction ; consecrate to faith 
In him who bled for man upon the cross ; 
Hallowed to revelation ; and no less 
To reason's mandates ; and the hopes divine 
Of pure imagination ; — above all, 
\ To charity, and love, that have provided, 
Within these precincts, a capacious bed 
And receptacle, open to the good 
 And evil, to the just and the unjust ; 
 In which they find an equal resting-place : 
Even as the multitude of kindred brooks 
 And streams, whose murmur fills this hollow vale, 
i Whether their course be turbulent or smooth, 
i Their waters clear or sullied, all are lost 
■ Within the bosom of yon crystal Lake, 
And end their journey in the same repose ! 

And blest are they who sleep ; and we that know, 
While in a spot like this we breathe and walk, 
That all beneath us by the wings are covered 
Of motherly humanity, outspread 
And gathering all within their tender shade, 
Though loth and slow to come ! A battle-field, 
In stillness left when slaughter is no more, 
With this compared, makes a strange spectacle ! 
A dismal prospect yields the wild shore strewn 
With wrecks, and trod by feet of young and old 
Wandering about in miserable search 
Of friends or kindred, whom the angry sea 
Restores not to their prayer! Ah! who would 
think 
That all the scattered subjects which compose 
Earth's melancholy vision through the space 
Of all her climes — these wretched, these depraved, 
To virtue lost, insensible of peace, 
From the delights of charity cut off, 
To pity dead, the oppressor and the opprest ; 
Tyrants who utter the destroying word, 
And slaves who will consent to be destroyed — 
Were of one species with the sheltered few, 
Who, with a dutiful and tender hand, 
Lodged, in a dear appropriated spot, 
This file of infants ; some that never breathed 
The vital air ; others, which, though allowed 
That privilege, did yet expire too soon, 
Or with too brief a warning, to admit 
Administration of the holy rite 
That lovingly consigns the babe to the arms 
Of Jesus, and his everlasting care. 
These that in trembling hope are laid apart; 
And the besprinkled nursling, unrequired 
Till he begins to smile upon the breast 
That feeds him ; and the tottering little-one 
Taken from air and sunshine when the rose 
Of infancy first blooms upon his cheek ; 
The thinking, thoughtless, school-boy ; the bold 
youth 
Of soul impetuous, and the bashful maid 
Smitten while all the promises of life 
Are opening round her ; those of middle age, 
Cast down while confident in strength they stand, 
Like pillars fixed more firmly, as might seem, 
And more secure, by very weight of all 
That, for support, rests on them ; the decayed 
And burthensome ; and lastly, that poor few 
Whose light of reason is with age extinct ; 
The hopeful and the hopeless, first and last, 
The earliest summoned and the longest spared — 
Are here deposited, with tribute paid 
Various, but unto each some tribute paid ; 
As if, amid these peaceful hills and groves, 
p p  


 

THE EXCURSION. 

Society were touched with kind concern, 
And gentle ' Nature grieved, that one should die ;' 
Or, if the change demanded no regret, 
Observed the liberating stroke — and blessed. 
And whence that tribute? wherefore these 
regards i 
Not from the naked Heart alone of Man 
(Though claiming high distinction upon earth 
As the sole spring and fountain-head of tears, 
His own peculiar utterance for distress 
Or gladness) — No," the philosophic Priest 
Continued, " 'tis not in the vital seat 
Of feeling to produce them, without aid 
From the pure soul, the soul sublime and pure ; 
With her two faculties of eye and ear, 
The one by which a creature, whom his sins 
Have rendered prone, can upward look to heaven; 
The other that empowers him to perceive 
The voice of Deity, on height and plain, 
Whispering those truths in stillness, which the 
Word, 
To the four quarters of the winds, proclaims. 

Not without such assistance could the use 
Of these benign observances prevail : 
Thus are they born, thus fostered, thus maintained; 
And by the care prospective of our wise 
Forefathers, who, to guard against the shocks 
The fluctuation and decay of things, 
Embodied and established these high truths 
In solemn institutions : — men convinced 
That life is love and immortality, 
The being one, and one the element. 
There lies the channel, and original bed, 
From the beginning, hollowed out and scooped 
For Man's affections — else betrayed and lost, 
And swallowed up 'mid deserts infinite ! 
This is the genuine course, the aim, and end 
Of prescient reason ; all conclusions else 
Are abject, vain, presumptuous, and perverse. 
The faith partaking of those holy times, 
Life, I repeat, is energy of love 
Divine or human ; exercised in pain, 
In strife, and tribulation ; and ordained, 
If so approved and sanctified, to pass, 
Through shades and silent rest, to endless joy." 

BOOK SIXTH. 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE 
MOUNTAINS. 

ARGUMENT. 
Poet's Address to the State and Church of England— The 
Pastor not inferior to the ancient Worthies of the 
Church — He begins his Narratives with an instance of 
unrequited Love— Anguish of mind subdued, and how 
—The lonely Miner — An instance of perseverance — 
Which leads by contrast to an example of abused talents, 
irresolution, and weakness— Solitary, applying this 
covertly to his own case, asks for an instance of some 
Stranger, whose dispositions may have led him to end 
his days here— Pastor, in answer, gives an account of 
the harmonising influence of Solitude upon two men of 
opposite principles, who had encountered agitations in 
public life— The rule by which Peace may be obtained 
expressed, and where— Solitary hints at an overpower- 
ing Fatality— Answer of the Pastor— What subjects he 
will exclude from his Narratives— Conversation upon 
this— Instance of an unamiable character, a Female 
and why given— Contrasted with this, a meek sufferer, 
from unguarded and betrayed love— Instance of heavier 
guilt, and its consequences to the Offender— With this 
instance of a Marriage Contract broken is contrasted 
one of a Widower, evidencing his faithful affection 
towards his deceased wife by his care of their female 
Children. 

Hail to the crown by Freedom shaped — to gird 
An English Sovereign's brow ! and to the throne 
Whereon he sits ! Whose deep foundations He 
In veneration and the people's love ; 
Whose steps are equity, whose seat is law. 
■ — Hail to the State of England ! And conjoin 
With this a salutation as devout, 
Made to the spiritual fabric of her Church ; 
Founded in truth ; by blood of Martyrdom 
Cemented ; by the hands of Wisdom reared 
In beauty of holiness, with ordered pomp, 
Decent and unreproved. The voice, that greets 
The majesty of both, shall pray for both ; 
That, mutually protected and sustained, 
They may endure long as the sea surrounds 
This favoured Land, or sunshine warms her soil. 
And , ye swelling hills, and spacious plains ! 
Besprent from shore to shore with steeple-towers, 
And spires whose ' silent finger points to heaven ;' 
Nor wanting, at wide intervals, the bulk 
Of ancient minster lifted above the cloud 
Of the dense air, which town or city breeds 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

To intercept the sun's glad beams — may ne'er 
That true succession fail of English hearts, 
Who, with ancestral feeling, can perceive 
What in those holy structures ye possess 
Of ornamental interest, and the charm 
Of pious sentiment diffused afar, 
And human charity, and social love. 
. — Thus never shall the indignities of time 
Approach their reverend graces, unopposed ; 
Nor shall the elements be free to hurt 
Their fair proportions ; nor the blinder rage 
Of bigot zeal madly to overturn ; 
And, if the desolating hand of war 
Spare them, they shall continue to bestow, 
Upon the thronged abodes of busy men 
(Depraved, and ever prone to fill the mind 
Exclusively with transitory things) 
An air and mien of dignified pursuit ; 
Of sweet civility, on rustic wilds. 
The Poet, fostering for his native land 
Such hope, entreats that servants may abound 
Of those pure altars worthy ; ministers 
Detached from pleasure, to the love of gain 
Superior, insusceptible of pride, 
And by ambitious longings undisturbed; 
Men, whose delight is where their duty leads 
Or fixes them ; whose least distinguished day 
Shines with some portion of that heavenly lustre 
Which makes the sabbath lovely in the sight 
Of blessed angels, pitying human cares. 
— And, as on earth it is the doom of truth 
To be perpetually attacked by foes 
Open or covert, be that priesthood still, 
For her defence, replenished with a band 
Of strenuous champions, in scholastic arts 
Thoroughly disciplined ; nor (if in course 
Of the revolving world's disturbances 
Cause should recur, which righteous Heaven avert ! 
To meet such trial) from their spiritual sires 
Degenerate ; who, constrained to wield the sword 
Of disputation, shrunk not, though assailed 
With hostile din, and combating in sight 
Of angry umpires, partial and unjust ; 
And did, thereafter, bathe their hands in fire, 
So to declare the conscience satisfied : 
Nor for their bodies would accept release ; 
But, blessing God and praising him, bequeathed 
With their last breath, from out the smouldering 
ilame, 
The faith which they by diligence had earned, 
Or, through illuminating grace, received, 
For their dear countrymen, and all mankind. 
high example, constancy divine ! 

Even such a Man (inheriting the zeal 
And from the sanctity of elder times 
Not deviating, — a priest, the like of whom, 
If multiplied, and in their stations set, 
Would o'er the bosom of a joyful land 
Spread true religion and her genuine fruits) 
Before me stood that day ; on holy ground 
Fraught with the relics of mortality, 
Exalting tender themes, by just degrees 
To lofty raised ; and to the highest, last ; 
The head and mighty paramount of truths, — 
Immortal life, in never-fading worlds, 
For mortal creatures, conquered and secured. 
That basis laid, those principles of faith 
Announced, as a preparatory act 
Of reverence done to the spirit of the place, 
The Pastor cast his eyes upon the ground ; 
Not, as before, Hke one oppressed with awe, 
But with a mild and social cheerfulness ; 
Then to the Solitary turned, and spake. 
" At morn or eve, in your retired domain, 
Perchance you not unfrequently have marked 
A Visitor — in quest of herbs and flowers ; 
Too delicate employ, as would appear, 
For one, who, though of drooping mien, had yet 
From nature's kindliness received a frame 
Robust as ever rural labour bred." 
The Solitary answered : " Such a Form 
Full well I recollect. We often crossed 
Each other's path ; but, as the Intruder seemed 
Fondly to prize the silence which he kept, 
And I as willingly did cherish mine, 
We met, and passed, hke shadows. I have heard, 
From my good Host, that being crazed in brain 
By unrequited love, he scaled the rocks, 
Dived into caves, and pierced the matted woods, 
In hope to find some virtuous herb of power 
To cure his malady ! " 
The Vicar smiled, — 
" Alas ! before to-morrow's sun goes down 
His habitation will be here : for him 
That open grave is destined." 
" Died he then 
Of pain and grief?" the Solitary asked, 
"Do not believe it ; never could that be !" 
" He loved," the Vicar answered, " deeply loved, 
Loved fondly, truly, fervently ; and dared 
At length to tell his love, but sued in vain ; 
Rejected, yea repelled ; and, if with scorn 
Upon the haughty maiden's brow, 'tis but 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

A high-prized plume which female Beauty wears 
In wantonness of conquest, or puts on 
To cheat the world, or from herself to hide 
Humiliation, when no longer free. 
TlMt he could hrook, and glory in ;— but when 
The tidings came that she whom he had wooed 
Was wedded to another, and his heart 
Was forced to rend away its only hope ; 
Then, Pity could have scarcely found on earth 
An object worthier of regard than he, 
In the transition of that bitter hour ! 
Lost was she, lost ; nor could the Sufferer say 
That in the act of preference he had been 
Unjustly dealt with ; but the Maid was gone ! 
Had vanished from his prospects and desires ; 
Not by translation to the heavenly choir 
Who have put off their mortal spoils— ah no ! 
She lives another's wishes to complete, — 
' Joy be their lot, and happiness,' he cried, 
< His lot and hers, as misery must be mine ! ' 
Such was that strong concussion ; but the Man, 
Who trembled, trunk and limbs, like some huge oak 
By a fierce tempest shaken, soon resumed 
The stedfast quiet natural to a mind 
Of composition gentle and sedate, 
And, in its movements, circumspect and slow. 
To books, and to the long-forsaken desk, 
O'er which enchained by science he had loved 
To bend, he stoutly re-addressed himself, 
Resolved to quell his pain, and search for truth 
With keener appetite (if that might be) 
And closer industry. Of what ensued 
Within the heart no outward sign appeared 
Till a betraying sickliness was seen 
To tinge his cheek ; and through his frame it crept 
With slow mutation unconcealable ; 
Such universal change as autumn makes 
In the fair body of a leafy grove 
Discoloured, then divested. 
'Tis affirmed 
By poets skilled in nature's secret ways 
That Love will not submit to be controlled 
By mastery : — and the good Man lacked not friends 
Who strove to instil this truth into his mind, 
A mind in all heart-mysteries unversed. 
' Go to the hills,' said one, ' remit a while 
' This baneful diligence : — at early morn 
' Court the fresh air, explore the heaths and woods ; 
' And, leaving it to others to foretell, 
' By calculations sage, the ebb and flow 
' Of tides, and when the moon will be eclipsed, 
' Do you, for your own benefit, construct 
' A calendar of flowers, plucked as they blow 

' Where health abides, and cheerfulness, and peace/ 
The attempt was made ; — 'tis needless to report 
How hopelessly ; but innocence is strong, 
And an entire simplicity of mind 
A thing most sacred in the eye of Heaven ; 
That opens, for such sufferers, relief 
Within the soul, fountains of grace divine ; 
And doth commend their weakness and disease 
To Nature's care, assisted in her office 
By all the elements that round her wait 
To generate, to preserve, and to restore ; 
And by her beautiful array of forms 
Shedding sweet influence from above ; or pure 
Delight exhaling from the ground they tread." 
" Impute it not to impatience, if," exclaimed 
The Wanderer, " I infer that he was healed 
By perseverance in the course prescribed." 
" You do not err : the powers, that had been lost 
By slow degrees, were gradually regained ; 
The fluttering nerves composed ; the beating heart 
In rest established ; and the jarring thoughts 
To harmony restored. — But yon dark mould 
Will cover him, in the fulness of his strength, 
Hastily smitten by a fever's force ; 
Yet not with stroke so sudden as refused 
Time to look back with tenderness on her 
Whom he had loved in passion ; and to send 
Some farewell words — with one, but one, request ; 
That, from his dying hand, she would accept 
Of his possessions that which most he prized ; 
A book, upon whose leaves some chosen plants, 
By his own hand disposed with nicest care, 
In undecaying beauty were preserved ; 
Mute register, to him, of time and place, 
And various fluctuations in the breast ; 
To her, a monument of faithful love 
Conquered, and in tranquillity retained ! 
Close to his destined habitation, lies 
One who achieved a humbler victory, 
Though marvellous in its kind. A place there is 
High in these mountains, that allured a band 
Of keen adventurers to unite their pains 
In search of precious ore : they tried, were foiled— 
And all desisted, all, save him alone. 
He, taking counsel of his own clear thoughts, 
And trusting only to his own weak hands, 
Urged unremittingly the stubborn work, 
Unseconded, uncountenanced ; then, as time 
Passed on, while still his lonely efforts found 
No recompense, derided ; and at length, 
By many pitied, as insane of mind ; 

THE CHURCH- YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

By others dreaded as the luckless thrall 
Of subterranean Spirits feeding hope 
By various mockery of sight and sound ; 
Hope after hope, encouraged and destroyed. 
— But when the lord of seasons had matured 
The fruits of earth through space of twice ten years, 
The mountain's entrails offered to his view 
And trembling grasp the long-deferred reward. 
Not with more transport did Columbus greet 
A world, his rich discovery ! But our Swain, 
A very hero till his point was gained, 
Proved all unable to support the weight 
Of prosperous fortune. On the fields he looked 
With an unsettled liberty of thought, 
Wishes and endless schemes ; by daylight walked 
Giddy and restless ; ever and anon 
Quaffed in his gratitude immoderate cups ; 
And truly might be said to die of joy ! 
He vanished ; but conspicuous to this day 
The path remains that linked his cottage-door 
To the mine's mouth ; a long and slanting track, 
Upon the rugged mountain's stony side, 
Worn by his daily visits to and from 
The darksome centre of a constant hope. 
This vestige, neither force of beating rain, 
Nor the vicissitudes of frost and thaw 
j Shall cause to fade, till ages pass away ; 
i And it is named, in memory of the event, 
, The Path of Perseverance." 
" Thou from whom 
Man has his strength," exclaimed the Wanderer, 
" oh ! 
j Do thou direct it ! To the virtuous grant 
The penetrative eye which can perceive 
 In this blind world the guiding vein of hope ; 
That, like this Labourer, such may dig their way, 
' Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified ;' 
Grant to the wise his firmness of resolve ! " 
" That prayer were not superfluous," said the 
Priest, 
"Amid the noblest relics, proudest dust, 
That Westminster, for Britain's glory, holds 
Within the bosom of her awful pile, 
Ambitiously collected. Yet the sigh, 
Which wafts that prayer to heaven, is due to all, 
Wherever laid, who living fell below 
Their virtue's humbler mark ; a sigh of pain 
If to the opposite extreme they sank. 
How would you pity her who yonder rests ; 
Him, farther off ; the pair, who here are laid ; 
But, above all, that mixture of earth's mould 
Whom sight of this green hillock to my mind 
Recals ! 

He lived not till his locks were nipped 
By seasonable frost of age ; nor died 
Before his temples, prematurely forced 
To mix the manly brown with silver grey, 
Gave obvious instance of the sad effect 
Produced, when thoughtless Folly hath usurped 
The natural crown that sage Experience wears. 
Gay, volatile, ingenious, quick to learn, 
And prompt to exhibit all that he possessed 
Or could perform ; a zealous actor, hired 
Into the troop of mirth, a soldier, sworn 
Into the lists of giddy enterprise — 
Such was he ; yet, as if within his frame 
Two several souls alternately had lodged, 
Two sets of manners could the Youth put on ; 
And, fraught with antics as the Indian bird 
That writhes and chatters in her wiry cage, 
Was graceful, when it pleased him, smooth and still 
As the mute swan that floats adown the stream, 
Or, on the waters of the unruffled lake, 
Anchors her placid beauty. Not a leaf, 
That flutters on the bough, lighter than he ; 
And not a flower, that droops in the green shade, 
More winningly reserved ! If ye enquire 
How such consummate elegance was bred 
Amid these wilds, this answer may suffice ; 
'Twas Nature's will ; who sometimes undertakes, 
For the reproof of human vanity, 
Art to outstrip in her peculiar walk. 
Hence, for this Favourite — lavishly endowed 
With personal gifts, and bright instinctive wit, 
While both, embellishing each other, stood 
Yet farther recommended by the charm 
Of fine demeanour, and by dance and song, 
And skill in letters — every fancy shaped 
Fair expectations ; nor, when to the world's 
Capacious field forth went the Adventurer, there 
Were he and his attainments overlooked, 
Or scantily rewarded ; but all hopes, 
Cherished for him, he suffered to depart, 
Like blighted buds ; or clouds that mimicked land 
Before the sailor's eye ; or diamond drops 
That sparkling decked the morning grass ; or aught 
That was attractive, and hath ceased to be ! 
Yet, when this Prodigal returned, the rites 
Of joyful greeting were on him bestowed, 
Who, by humiliation undeterred, 
Sought for his weariness a place of rest 
Within his Father's gates. — Whence came he ? — 
clothed 
In tattered garb, from hovels where abides 
Necessity, the stationary host 
Of vagrant poverty ; from rifted barns 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Where no one dwells but the wide-staring owl 
And the owl's prey ; from these bare haunts, to which 
He had descended from the proud saloon, 
He came, the ghost of beauty and of health, 
The wreck of gaiety ! But soon revived 
In strength, in power refitted, he renewed 
His suit to Fortune ; and she smiled again 
Upon a fickle Ingrate. Thrice he rose, 
Thrice sank as willingly. For he — whose nerves 
Were used to thrill with pleasure, while his voice 
Softly accompanied the tuneful harp, 
By the nice finger of fair ladies touched 
In glittering halls — was able to derive 
No less enjoyment from an abject choice. 
Who happier for the moment — who more blithe 
Than this fallen Spirit? in those dreary holds- 
His talents lending to exalt the freaks 
Of merry-making beggars, — now, provoked 
To laughter multiplied in louder peals 
By his malicious wit ; then, all enchained 
With mute astonishment, themselves to see 
In their own arts outdone, their fame eclipsed, 
As by the very presence of the Fiend 
Who dictates and inspires illusive feats, 
For knavish purposes \ The city, too, 
(With shame I speak it) to her guilty bowers 
Allured him, sunk so low in self-respect 
As there to linger, there to eat his bread, 
Hired minstrel of voluptuous blandishment ; 
Charming the air with skill of hand or voice, 
Listen who would, be wrought upon who might, 
Sincerely wretched hearts, or falsely gay. 
— Such the too frequent tenour of his boast 
In ears that relished the report ; — but all 
Was from his Parents happily concealed ; 
Who saw enough for blame and pitying love. 
They also were permitted to receive 
His last, repentant breath ; and closed his eyes, 
No more to open on that irksome world 
Where he had long existed in the state 
Of a young fowl beneath one mother hatched, 
Though from another sprung, different in kind : 
Where he had lived, and could not cease to live, 
Distracted in propensity ; content 
With neither element of good or ill ; 
And yet in both rejoicing ; man unblest ; 
Of contradictions infinite the slave, 
Till his deliverance, when Mercy made him 
One with himself, and one with them that sleep." 
" 'Tis strange," observed the Solitary, " strange 
It seems, and scarcely less than pitiful, 
That in a land where charity provides 
For all that can no longer feed themselves, 

A man like this should choose to bring his shame 
To the parental door ; and with his sighs 
Infect the air which he had freely breathed 
In happy infancy. He could not pine, 
Through lack of converse ; no — he must have found 
Abundant exercise for thought and speech, 
In his dividual being, self-reviewed, 
Self-catechised, self-punished. — Some there are 
Who, drawing near their final home, and much 
And daily longing that the same were reached, 
Would rather shun than seek the fellowship 
Of kindred mould. — Such haply here are laid ? " 
"Yes," said the Priest, "the Genius of our hills— 
Who seems, by these stupendous barriers cast 
Round his domain, desirous not alone 
To keep his own, but also to exclude 
All other progeny — doth sometimes lure, 
Even by his studied depth of privacy, 
The unhappy alien hoping to obtain 
Concealment, or seduced by wish to find, 
In place from outward molestation free, 
Helps to internal ease. Of many such 
Could I discourse ; but as their stay was brief, 
So their departure only left behind 
Fancies, and loose conjectures. Other trace 
Survives, for worthy mention, of a pair 
Who, from the pressure of their several fates, 
Meeting as strangers, in a petty town 
Whose blue roofs ornament a distant reach 
Of this far-winding vale, remained as friends 
True to their choice ; and gave their bones in trust 
To this loved cemetery, here to lodge 
With unescutcheoned privacy interred 
Far from the family vault. — A Chieftain one 
By right of birth ; within whose spotless breast 
The fire of ancient Caledonia burned : 
He, with the foremost whose impatience hailed 
The Stuart, landing to resume, by force 
Of arms, the crown which bigotry had lost, 
Aroused his clan ; and, fighting at their head, 
With his brave sword endeavoured to prevent 
Culloden's fatal overthrow. Escaped 
From that disastrous rout, to foreign shores 
He fled ; and when the lenient hand of time 
Those troubles had appeased, he sought and gained, 
For his obscured condition, an obscure 
Retreat, within tins nook of English ground. 
The other, born in Britain's southern tract, 
Had fixed his milder loyalty, and placed 
His gentler sentiments of love and hatej 
There, where they placed them who in conscience 
prized 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

The new succession, as a line of kings 
Whose oath had virtue to protect the land 
Against the dire assaults of papacy 
And arbitrary rule. But launch thy bark 
On the distempered flood of public life, 
And cause for most rare triumph will be thine 
If, spite of keenest eye and steadiest hand, 
The stream, that bears thee forward, prove not, soon 
Or late, a perilous master. He — who oft, 
Beneath the battlements and stately trees 
That round his mansion cast a sober gloom, 
Had moralised on this, and other truths 
Of kindred import, pleased and satisfied — 
Was forced to vent his wisdom with a sigh 
Heaved from the heart in fortune's bitterness, 
When he had crushed a plentiful estate 
By ruinous contest, to obtain a seat 
In Britain's senate. Fruitless was the attempt : 
And while the uproar of that desperate strife 
Continued yet to vibrate on his ear, 
The vanquished Whig, under a borrowed name, 
(For the mere sound and echo of his own 
Haunted him with sensations of disgust 
That he was glad to lose) slunk from the world 
To the deep shade of those untra veiled Wilds ; 
In which the Scottish Laird had long possessed 
An undisturbed abode. Here, then, they met, 
Two doughty champions ; flaming Jacobite 
And sullen Hanoverian ! You might think 
That losses and vexations, less severe 
Than those which they had severally sustained, 
Would have inclined each to abate his zeal 
For his ungrateful cause ; no, — I have heard 
My reverend Father tell that, 'mid the calm 
Of that small town encountering thus, they filled, 
Daily, its bowling-green with harmless strife ; 
Plagued with uncharitable thoughts the church ; 
And vexed the market-place. But in the breasts 
Of these opponents gradually was wrought, 
With little change of general sentiment, 
Such leaning towards each other, that their days 
By choice were spent in constant fellowship ; 
And if, at times, they fretted with the yoke, 
Those very bickerings made them love it more. 
A favourite boundary to their lengthened walks 
This Church- yard was. And, whether they had come 
Treading their path in sympathy and linked 
In social converse, or by some short space 
Discreetly parted to preserve the peace, 
One spirit seldom failed to extend its sway 
Over both minds, when they awhile had marked 
The visible quiet of this holy ground, 
And breathed its soothing air ; — the spirit of hope 

And saintly magnanimity ; that — spurning 
The field of selfish difference and dispute, 
And every care which transitory things, 
Earth and the kingdoms of the earth, create — 
Doth, by a rapture of forgetfulness, 
Preclude forgiveness, from the praise debarred, 
Which else the Christian virtue might have claimed. 
There five who yet remember here to have seen 
Their courtly figures, seated on the stump 
Of an old yew, their favourite resting-place. 
But as the remnant of the long-lived tree 
Was disappearing by a swift decay, 
They, with joint care, determined to erect, 
Upon its site, a dial, that might stand 
For public use preserved, and thus survive 
As their own private monument: for this 
Was the particular spot, in which they wished 
(And Heaven was pleased to accomplish the desire) 
That, undivided, their remains should lie. 
So, where the mouldered tree had stood, was raised 
Yon structure, framing, with the ascent of steps 
That to the decorated pillar lead, 
A work of art more sumptuous than might seem 
To suit this place ; yet built in no proud scorn 
Of rustic homeliness ; they only aimed 
To ensure for it respectful guardianship. 
Around the margin of the plate, whereon 
The shadow falls to note the stealthy hours, 
Winds an inscriptive legend." — At these words 
Thither we turned ; and gathered, as we read, 
The appropriate sense, in Latin numbers couched : 
' Time files ; it is Ms melancholy tash 
To bring, and bear away, delusive hopes, 
And re-produce the troubles he destroys. 
But, while his blindness thus is occupied, 
Discerning Mortal  do thou serve the will 
Of Time's eternal Master, and that peace, 
Which the world wants, shall be for thee confirmed / ' 
" Smooth verse, inspired by no unlettered Muse," 
Exclaimed the Sceptic, " and the strain of thought 
Accords with nature's language ; — the soft voice 
Of yon white torrent falling down the rocks 
Speaks, less distinctly, to the same effect. 
If, then, theh- blended influence be not lost 
Upon our hearts, not wholly lost, I grant, 
Even upon mine, the more are we required 
To feel for those among our fellow-men, 
Who, offering no obeisance to the world, 
Are yet made desperate by ' too quick a sense 
Of constant infelicity,' cut off 
From peace like exiles on some barren rock, 
Their life's appointed prison ; not more free 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Than sentinels, between two armies, set, 
With nothing better, in the chill night air, 
Than their own thoughts to comfort them. Say 
why 
That ancient story of Prometheus chained 
To the bare rock, on frozen Caucasus ; 
The vulture, the inexhaustible repast 
Drawn from his vitals \ Say what meant the woes 
By Tantalus entailed upon his race, 
And the dark sorrows of the line of Thebes? 
Fictions in form, but in their substance truths, 
Tremendous truths ! familiar to the men 
Of long-past times, nor obsolete in ours. 
Exchange the shepherd's frock of native grey 
For robes with regal purple tinged ; convert 
The crook into a sceptre ; give the pomp 
Of circumstance ; and here the tragic Muse 
Shall find apt subjects for her highest art. 
Amid the groves, under the shadowy hills, 
The generations are prepared ; the pangs, 
The internal pangs, are ready ; the dread strife 
Of poor humanity's afflicted will 
Struggling in vain with ruthless destiny." 
" Though," said the Priest in answer, "these be 
terms 
Which a divine philosophy rejects, 
We, whose established and unfailing trust 
Is in controlling Providence, admit 
That, through all stations, human life abounds 
With mysteries ;— for, if Faith were left untried, 
How could the might, that lurks within her, then 
Be shown ? her glorious excellence — that ranks 
Among the first of Powers and Virtues — proved ? 
Our system is not fashioned to preclude 
That sympathy which you for others ask ; 
And I could tell, not travelling for my theme 
Beyond these humble graves, of grievous crimes 
And strange disasters ; but I pass them by. 
Loth to disturb what Heaven hath hushed in peace. 
— Still less, far less, am I inclined to treat 
Of Man degraded in his Maker's sight 
By the deformities of brutish vice : 
For, in such portraits, though a vulgar face 
And a coarse outside of repulsive life 
And unaffecting manners might at once 
Be recognised by all — " « Ah ! do not think," 
The Wanderer somewhat eagerly exclaimed, 
" Wish could be ours that you, for such poor gain, 
(Gain shall I call it ? — gain of what ? — for whom ?) 
Should breathe a word tending to violate 
Your own pure spirit. Not a step we look for 
In slight of that forbearance and reserve 
Which common human-heartedness inspires, 

And mortal ignorance and frailty claim, 
Upon this sacred ground, if nowhere else." 
" Time," said the Solitary, "be it far 
From us to infringe the laws of charity. 
Let judgment here in mercy be pronounced ; 
This, self-respecting Nature prompts, and this 
Wisdom enjoins ; but if the thing we seek 
Be genuine knowledge, bear we then in mind 
How, from his lofty throne, the sun can fling 
Colours as bright on exhalations bred 
By weedy pool or pestilential swamp, 
As by the rivulet sparkling where it runs, 
Or the pellucid lake." 
" Small risk," said I, 
" Of such illusion do we here incur ; 
Temptation here is none to exceed the truth ; 
No evidence appears that they who rest 
Within this ground, were covetous of praise, 
Or of remembrance even, deserved or not. 
Green is the Church-yard, beautiful and green, 
Ridge rising gently by the side of ridge, 
A heaving surface, almost wholly free 
From interruption of sepulchral stones, 
And mantled o'er with aboriginal turf 
And everlasting flowers. These Dalesmen trust 
The fingering gleam of their departed fives 
To oral record, and the silent heart ; 
Depositories faithful and more kind 
Than fondest epitaph : for, if those fail, 
What boots the sculptured tomb  And who can 
blame, 
Who rather would not envy, men that feel 
This mutual confidence ; if, from such source, 
The practice flow, — if thence, or from a deep 
And general humility in death ? 
Nor should I much condemn it, if it spring 
From disregard of time's destructive power, 
As only capable to prey on things 
Of earth, and human nature's mortal part. 
Yet — in less simple districts, where we see 
Stone lift its forehead emulous of stone 
In courting notice ; and the ground all paved 
With commendations of departed worth ; 
Reading, where'er we turn, of innocent fives, 
Of each domestic charity fulfilled, 
And sufferings meekly borne — I, for my part, 
Though with the silence pleased that here prevails, 
Among those fair recitals also range, 
Soothed by the natural spirit which they breathe. 
And, in the centre of a world whose soil 
Is rank with all unkindness, compassed round 
With such memorials, I have sometimes felt, 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

It was no momentary happiness 
To have one Enclosure where the voice that speaks 
In envy or detraction is not heard ; 
: "Which malice may not enter ; where the traces 
Of evil inclinations are unknown ; 
Where love and pity tenderly unite 
With resignation ; and no jarring tone 
Intrudes, the peaceful concert to disturb 
Of amity and gratitude." 
" Thus sanctioned," 
The Pastor said, " I willingly confine 
My narratives to subjects that excite 
Feelings with these accordant ; love, esteem, 
And admiration ; lifting up a veil, 
A sunbeam introducing among hearts 
: Retired and covert ; so that ye shall have 
Clear images before your gladdened eyes 
• Of nature's unambitious underwood, 
And flowers that prosper in the shade. And 
when 
I speak of such among my flock as swerved 
Or fell, those only shall be singled out 
I Upon whose lapse, or error, something more 
Than brotherly forgiveness may attend ; 
To such will we restrict our notice, else 
Better my tongue were mute. 
And yet there are, 
I feel, good reasons why we should not leave 
Wholly untraced a more forbidding way. 
i For, strength to persevere and to support, 
I And energy to conquer and repel — 
These elements of virtue, that declare 
', The native grandeur of the human soul — 
Are oft-times not unprofitably shown 
, In the perverseness of a selfish course : 
Truth every day exemplified, no less 
In the grey cottage by the murmuring stream 
Than in fantastic conqueror's roving camp, 
Or 'mid the factious senate unappalled 
Whoe'er may sink, or rise — to sink again, 
As merciless proscription ebbs and flows. 
There," said the Vicar, pointing as he spake, 
" A woman rests in peace ; surpassed by few 
j In power of mind, and eloquent discourse. 
Tall was her stature ; her complexion dark 
And saturnine ; her head not raised to hold 
Converse with heaven, nor yet deprest towards 
earth, 
' But in projection carried, as she walked 
j For ever musing. Sunken were her eyes ; 
i Wrinkled and furrowed with habitual thought 
; Was her broad forehead ; like the brow of one 
Whose visual nerve shrinks from a painful glare 

Of overpowering light. — While yet a child, 
She, 'mid the humble flowerets of the vale, 
Towered like the imperial thistle, not unfurnished 
With its appropriate grace, yet rather seeking 
To be admired, than coveted and loved. 
Even at that age she ruled, a sovereign queen, 
Over her comrades ; else their simple sports, 
Wanting all relish for her strenuous mind, 
Had crossed her only to be shunned with scorn. 
— Oh ! pang of sorrowful regret for those 
Whom, in their youth, sweet study has enthralled, 
That they have lived for harsher servitude, 
Whether in soul, in body, or estate ! 
Such doom was hers ; yet nothing could subdue 
Her keen desire of knowledge, nor efface 
Those brighter images by books imprest 
Upon her memory, faithfully as stars 
That occupy their places, and, though oft 
Hidden by clouds, and oft bedimmed by haze, 
Are not to be extinguished, nor impaired. 
Two passions, both degenerate, for they both 
Began in honour, gradually obtained 
Rule over her, and vexed her daily life ; 
An unremitting, avaricious thrift ; 
And a strange thraldom of maternal love, 
That held her spirit, in its own despite, 
Bound — by vexation, and regret, and scorn, 
Constrained forgiveness, and relenting vows, 
And tears, in pride suppressed, in shame con- 
cealed — 
To a poor dissolute Son, her only child. 
— Her wedded days had opened with mishap, 
Whence dire dependence. What could she perform 
To shake the burthen off? Ah ! there was felt, 
Indignantly, the weakness of her sex. 
She mused, resolved, adhered to her resolve ; 
The hand grew slack in alms -giving, the heart 
Closed by degrees to charity ; heaven's blessing 
Not seeking from that source, she placed her trust 
In ceaseless pains — and strictest parsimony 
Which sternly hoarded all that could be spared, 
From each day's need, out of each day's least gain. 
Thus all was re-established, and a pile 
Constructed, that sufficed for every end, 
Save the contentment of the builder's mind ; 
A mind by nature indisposed to aught 
So placid, so inactive, as content ; 
A mind intolerant of lasting peace, 
And cherishing the pang her heart deplored. 
Dread life of conflict ! which I oft compared 
To the agitation of a brook that runs 
Down a rocky mountain, buried now and lost 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

In silent pools, now in strong eddies chained ; 
But never to be charmed to gentleness : 
Its best attainment fits of such repose 
As timid eyes might shrink from fathoming. 
A sudden illness seized her in the strength 
Of life's autumnal season. — Shall I tell 
How on her bed of death the Matron lay, 
To Providence submissive, so she thought; 
But fretted, vexed, and wrought upon, almost 
To anger, by the malady that griped 
Her prostrate frame with unrelaxing power, 
As the fierce eagle fastens on the lamb  
She prayed, she moaned ; — her husband's sister 
watched 
Her dreary pillow, waited on her needs ; 
And yet the very sound of that kind foot 
Was anguish to her ears ! 'And must she rule,' 
This was the death-doomed Woman heard to say 
In bitterness, ' and must she rule and reign, 
' Sole Mistress of this house, when I am gone ? 
• Tend what I tended, calling it her own ! ' 
Enough ; — I fear, too much. — One vernal evening, 
While she was yet in prime of health and strength, 
I well remember, while I passed her door 
Alone, with loitering step, and upward eye 
Turned towards the planet Jupiter that hung 
Above the centre of the Vale, a voice 
Roused me, her voice ; it said, ' That glorious star 
( In its untroubled element will shine 
' As now it shines, when we are laid in earth 
' And safe from all our sorrows.' With a sigh 
She spake, yet, I believe, not unsustained 
By faith hi glory that shall far transcend 
Aught by these perishable heavens disclosed 
To sight or mind. Nor less than care divine 
Is divine mercy. She, who had rebelled, 
Was into meekness softened and subdued ; 
Did, after trials not in vain prolonged, 
With resignation sink into the grave; 
And her uncharitable acts, I trust, 
And harsh unkindnesses are all forgiven, 
Tho', in this Vale, remembered with deep awe." . 

The Vicar paused ; and toward a seat advanced, 
A long stone-seat, fixed in the Church-yard wall ; 
Part shaded by cool sycamore, and part 
Offering a sunny resting-place to them 
Who seek the House of worship, while the bells 
Yet ring with all their voices, or before 
The last hath ceased its solitary knoll. 
Beneath the shade we all sate down ; and there 
His office, uninvited, he resumed. 

" As on a sunny bank, a tender lamb 
Lurks in safe shelter from the winds of March, 
Screened by its parent, so that little mound 
Lies guarded by its neighbour ; the small heap 
Speaks for itself ; an Infant there doth rest ; 
The sheltering hillock is the Mother's grave. 
If mild discourse, and manners that conferred 
A natural dignity on humblest rank ; 
If gladsome spirits, and benignant looks, 
That for a face not beautiful did more 
Than beauty for the fairest face can do ; 
And if religious tenderness of heart, 
Grieving for sin, and penitential tears 
Shed when the clouds had gathered and distaintd 
The spotless ether of a maiden life ; 
If these may make a hallowed spot of earth 
More holy in the sight of God or Man ; 
Then, o'er that mould, a sanctity shall brood 
Till the stars sicken at the day of doom. 
Ah ! what a warning for a thoughtless man, 
Could field or grove, could any spot of earth, 
Show to his eye an image of the pangs 
Which it hath witnessed ; render back an echo 
Of the sad steps by which it hath been trod ! 
There, by her innocent Baby's precious grave, 
And on the very turf that roofs her own, 
The Mother oft was seen to stand, or kneel 
In the broad day, a weeping Magdalene. 
Now she is not; the swelling turf reports 
Of the fresh shower, but of poor Ellen's tears 
Is silent ; nor is any vestige left 
Of the path worn by mournful tread of her 
Who, at her heart's light bidding, once had moved 
In virgin fearlessness, with step that seemed 
Caught from the pressure of elastic tuxf 
Upon the mountains gemmed with morning dew, 
In the prime hour of sweetest scents and airs. 
— Serious and thoughtful was her mind ; and yet, 
By reconcilement exquisite and rare, 
The form, port, motions, of this Cottage-girl 
Were such as might have quickened and inspired 
A Titian's hand, addrest to picture forth 
Oread or Dryad glancing through the shade 
What time the hunter's earliest horn is heard 
Startling the golden hills. 
A wide-spread elm 
Stands in our valley, named The Joyful Tree ; 
From dateless usage which our peasants hold 
Of giving welcome to the first of May 
By dances round its trunk. — And if the sky 
Permit, like honours, dance and song, are paid 
To the Twelfth Night, beneath the frosty stars 
Or the clear moon. The queen of these gay sports, 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

If not in beauty yet in sprightly air, 
Was hapless Ellen. — No one touched the ground 
So deftly, and the nicest maiden's locks 
Less gracefully were braided ; — but this praise, 
Methinks, would better suit another place. 
She loved, and fondly deemed herself beloved. 
— The road is dim, the current unperceived, 
The weakness painful and most pitiful, 
By which a virtuous woman, in pure youth, 
May be delivered to distress and shame. 
Such fate was hers. — The last time Ellen danced, 
Among her equals, round The Joyful Tree, 
She bore a secret burthen ; and full soon 
Was left to tremble for a breaking vow, — 
Then, to bewail a sternly-broken vow, 
Alone, within her widowed Mother's house. 
• It was the season of unfolding leaves, 
Of days advancing toward their utmost length, 
And small birds singing happily to mates 
Happy as they. With spirit-saddening power 
Winds pipe through fading woods ; but those blithe 
notes 
Strike the deserted to the heart ; I speak 
Of what I know, and what we feel within. 
i —Beside the cottage in which Ellen dwelt 
Stands a tall ash-tree ; to whose topmost twig 
A thrush resorts, and annually chants, 
At morn and evening from that naked perch, 
, While all the undergrove is thick with leaves, 
: A time-beguiling ditty, for delight 
Of his fond partner, silent in the nest. 
j — ' Ah why,' said Ellen, sighing to herself, 
' ' Why do not words, and kiss, and solemn pledge ; 
, ' And nature that is kind in woman's breast, 
' And reason that in man is wise and good, 
'And fear of him who is a righteous judge ; 
: ' Why do not these prevail for human life, 
: ' To keep two hearts together, that began 
' Their spring-time with one love, and that have need 
' Of mutual pity and forgiveness, sweet 
' To grant, or be received ; while that poor bird — 
. ' come and hear him ! Thou who hast to me 
, ' Been faithless, hear him, though a lowly creature, 
' One of God's simple children that yet know not 
j The universal Parent, how he sings 
! ' As if he wished the firmament of heaven 
 Should listen, and give back to him the voice 
' Of his triumphant constancy and love ; 
I ' The proclamation that he makes, how far 
' His darkness doth transcend our fickle light !' 
Such was the tender passage, not by me 
Repeated without loss of simple phrase, 

Which I perused, even as the words had been 
Committed by forsaken Ellen's hand 
To the blank margin of a Valentine, 
Bedropped with tears. 'Twill please you to be told 
That, studiously withdrawing from the eye 
Of all companionship, the Sufferer yet 
In lonely reading found a meek resource : 
How thankful for the warmth of summer days, 
When she could slip into the cottage-barn, 
And find a secret oratory there ; 
Or, in the garden, under friendly veil 
Of their long twilight, pore upon her book 
By the last lingering help of the open sky 
Until dark night dismissed her to her bed ! 
Thus did a waking fancy sometimes lose 
The unconquerable pang of despised love. 
A kindlier passion opened on her soul 
When that poor Child was born. Upon its face 
She gazed as on a pure and spotless gift 
Of unexpected promise, where a grief 
Or dread was all that had been thought of, — joy 
Far livelier than bewildered traveller feels, 
Amid a perilous waste that all night long 
Hath harassed him toiling through fearful storm, 
When he beholds the first pale speck serene 
Of day-spring, in the gloomy east, revealed, 
And greets it with thanksgiving. ' Till this hour,' 
Thus, in her Mother's hearing Ellen spake, 
' There was a stony region in my heart ; 
' But He, at whose command the parched rock 
' Was smitten, and poured forth a quenching stream, 
' Hath softened that obduracy, and made 
' Unlooked-for gladness in the desert place, 
' To save the perishing ; and, henceforth, I breathe 
' The air with cheerful spirit, for thy sake 
' My Infant ! and for that good Mother dear, 
' Who bore me ; and hath prayed for me in vain ; — 
' Yet not in vain ; it shall not be hi vain.' 
She spake, nor was the assurance unfulfilled ; 
And if heart-rending thoughts would oft return, 
They stayed not long. — The blameless Infant grew ; 
The Child whom Ellen and her Mother loved 
They soon were proud of; tended it and nursed ; 
A soothing comforter, although forlorn ; 
Like a poor singing-bird from distant lands ; 
Or a choice shrub, which he, who passes by 
With vacant mind, not seldom may observe 
Fair-flowering in a thinly-peopled house, 
Whose window, somewhat sadly, it adorns. 
Through four months' space the Infant drew its 
food 
From the maternal breast ; then scruples rose ; 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Thoughts, which the rich are free from, came and 
crossed 
The fond affection. She no more could bear 
By her offence to lay a twofold weight 
On a kind parent willing to forget 
Their slender means : so, to that parent's care 
Trusting her child, she left their common home, 
And undertook with dutiful content 
A Foster-mother's office. 
'Tis, perchance, 
Unknown to you that in these simple vales 
The natural feeling of equality 
Is by domestic service unimpaired ; 
Yet, though such service be, with us, removed 
From sense of degradation, not the less 
The ungentle mind can easily find means 
To impose severe restraints and laws unjust, 
Which hapless Ellen now was doomed to feel : 
For (blinded by an over-anxious dread 
Of such excitement and divided thought 
As with her office would but ill accord) 
The pair, whose infant she was bound to nurse, 
Forbad her all communion with her own : 
Week after week, the mandate they enforced. 
■ — So near ! yet not allowed, upon that sight 
To fix her eyes — alas ! 'twas hard to bear ! 
But worse affliction must be borne — far worse ; 
For 'tis Heaven's will — that, after a disease 
Begun and ended within three days' space, 
Her child should die ; as Ellen now exclaimed, 
Her own — deserted child ! — Once, only once, 
She saw it in that mortal malady ; 
And, on the burial-day, could scarcely gain 
Permission to attend its obsequies. 
She reached the house, last of the funeral train ; 
And some one, as she entered, having chanced 
To urge unthinkingly their prompt departure, 
' Nay,' said she, with commanding look, a spirit 
Of anger never seen in her before, 
' Nay, ye must wait my time !' and down she sate, 
And by the unclosed coffin kept her seat 
Weeping and looking, looking on and weeping, 
Upon the last sweet slumber of her Child, 
Until at length her soul was satisfied. 
You see the Infant's Grave ; and to this spot, 
The Mother, oft as she was sent abroad, 
On whatsoever errand, urged her steps : 
Hither she came ; here stood, and sometimes knelt 
In the broad day, a rueful Magdalene ! 
So call her ; for not only she bewailed 
A mother's loss, but mourned in bitterness 
Her own transgression ; penitent sincere 
As ever raised to heaven a streaming eye ! 

— At length the parents of the foster-child, 
Noting that in despite of their commands 
She still renewed and could not but renew 
Those visitations, ceased to send her forth ; 
Or, to the garden's narrow bounds, confined. 
I failed not to remind them that they erred ; 
For holy Nature might not thus be crossed, 
Thus wronged in woman's breast : in vain I pleaded 
But the green stalk of Ellen's life was snapped, 
And the flower drooped ; as every eye could see, 
It hung its head in mortal languishment. 
— Aided by this appearance, I at length 
Prevailed ; and, from those bonds released, she went 
Home to her mother's house. 
The Youth was fled ; 
The rash betrayer could not face the shame 
Or sorrow which his senseless guilt had caused ; 
And little would his presence, or proof given 
Of a relenting soul, have now availed ; 
For, like a shadow, he was passed away 
From Ellen's thoughts ; had perished to her mind 
For all concerns of fear, or hope, or love, 
Save only those which to their common shame, 
And to his moral being appertained : 
Hope from that quarter would, I know, have brought 
A heavenly comfort ; there she recognised 
An unrelaxiug bond, a mutual need ; 
There, and, as seemed, there only. 
She had built, 
Her fond maternal heart had built, a nest 
In blindness all too near the river's edge ; 
That work a summer flood with hasty swell 
Had swept away ; and now her Spirit longed 
For its last flight to heaven's security. 
— The bodily frame wasted from day to day ; 
Meanwhile, relinquishing all other cares, 
Her mind she strictly tutored to find peace 
And pleasure in endurance. Much she thought, 
And much she read ; and brooded feelingly 
Upon her own unworthiness. To me, 
As to a spiritual comforter and friend, 
Her heart she opened ; and no pains were spared 
To mitigate, as gently as I could, 
The sting of self-reproach, with healing words. 
Meek Saint ! through patience glorified on earth ! 
In whom, as by her lonely hearth she sate, 
The ghastly face of cold decay put on 
A sun-like beauty, and appeared divine ! 
May I not mention — that, within those walls, 
In due observance of her pious wish, 
The congregation joined with me in prayer 
For her soul's good ? Nor was that office vain. 
— Much did she suffer : but, if any friend, 
Beholding her condition, at the sight 

THE CHURCH- YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

Gave way to words of pity or complaint, 
She stilled them with a prompt reproof, and said, 
' ' He who afflicts me knows what I can bear ; 
' And, when I fail, and can endure no more, 
■ ' Will mercifully take me to himself.' 
So, through the cloud of death, her Spirit passed 
; Into that pure and unknown world of love 
Where injury cannot come : — and here is laid 
The mortal Body by her Infant's side." 
The Vicar ceased ; and downcast looks made known 
i That each had listened with his inmost heart. 
For me, the emotion scarcely was less strong 
Or less benign than that which I had felt 
'■ When seated near my venerable Friend, 
, Under those shady elms, from him I heard 
The story that retraced the slow decline 
Of Margaret, sinking on the lonely heath 
With the neglected house to which she clung. 
— I noted that the Solitary's cheek 
Confessed the power of nature. — Pleased though sad, 
i More pleased than sad, the grey-haired Wanderer 
sate; 
I Thanks to his pure imaginative soul 
j Capacious and serene ; his blameless life, 
■ His knowledge, wisdom, love of truth, and love 
Of human kind ! He was it who first broke 
' The pensive silence, saying : — 
"Blest are they 
Whose sorrow rather is to suffer wrong 
i Than to do wrong, albeit themselves have erred. 
This tale gives proof that Heaven most gently deals 
! With such, in their affliction. — Ellen's fate, 
i Her tender spirit, and her contrite heart, 
Call to my mind dark hints which I have heard 
Of one who died within this vale, by doom 
Heavier, as his offence was heavier far. 
Where, Sir, I pray you, where are laid the bones 
Of Wilfred Armathwaite \ " 
!The Vicar answered, 
. "In that green nook, close by the Church-yard wall, 
Beneath yon hawthorn, planted by myself 
■ In memory and for warning, and in sign 
 Of sweetness where dire anguish had been known, 
' ! Of reconcilement after deep offence — 
There doth he rest. No theme his fate supplies 
i For the smooth glozings of the indulgent world ; 
I Nor need the windings of his devious course 
Be here retraced ; — enough that, by mishap 
I And venial error, robbed of competence, 
And her obsequious shadow, peace of mind, 
j He craved a substitute in troubled joy ; 
I Against his conscience rose in arms, and, braving 
 Divine displeasure, broke the marriage-vow. 

That which he had been weak enough to do 
Was misery in remembrance ; he was stung, 
Stung by his inward thoughts, and by the smiles 
Of wife and children stung to agony. 
Wretched at home, he gained no peace abroad ; 
Ranged through the mountains, slept upon the earth, 
Asked comfort of the open air, and found 
No quiet in the darkness of the night, 
No pleasure in the beauty of the day. 
His flock he slighted : his paternal fields 
Became a clog to him, whose spirit wished 
To fly — but whither ! And this gracious Church, 
That wears a look so full of peace and hope 
And love, benignant mother of the vale, 
How fair amid her brood of cottages ! 
She was to him a sickness and reproach. 
Much to the last remained unknown : but this 
Is sure, that through remorse and grief he died ; 
Though pitied among men, absolved by God, 
He could not find forgiveness in himself ; 
Nor could endure the weight of his own shame. 
Here rests a Mother. But from her I turn 
And from her grave. — Behold — upon that ridge, 
That, stretching boldly from the mountain side, 
Carries into the centre of the vale 
Its rocks and woods — the Cottage where she dwelt ; 
And where yet dwells her faithful Partner, left 
(Full eight years past) the solitary prop 
Of many helpless Children. I begin 
With words that might be prelude to a tale 
Of sorrow and dejection ; but I feel 
No sadness, when I think of what mine eyes 
See daily in that happy family. 
— Bright garland form they for the pensive brow 
Of their undrooping Father's widowhood, 
Those six fair Daughters, budding yet — not one, 
Not one of all the band, a full-blown flower. 
Deprest, and desolate of soul, as once 
That Father was, and filled with anxious fear, 
Now, by experience taught, he stands assured, 
That God, who takes away, yet takes not half 
Of what he seems to take ; or gives it back, 
Not to our prayer, but far beyond our prayer ; 
He gives it — the boon produce of a soil 
Which our endeavours have refused to till, 
And hope hath never watered. The Abode, 
Whose grateful owner can attest these truths, 
Even were the object nearer to our sight, 
Would seem in no distinction to surpass 
The rudest habitations. Ye might think 
That it had sprung self-raised from earth, or grown 
Out of the living rock, to be adorned 
By nature only ; but, if thither led, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Ye would discover, then, a studious work 
Of many fancies, prompting many hands. 
Brought from the woods the honeysuckle twines 
Around the porch, and seems, in that trim place, 
A plant no longer wild ; the cultured rose 
There blossoms, strong in health, and will be soon 
Roof-high ; the wild pink crowns the garden-wall, 
And with the flowers are intermingled stones 
Sparry and bright, rough scatterings of the hills. 
These ornaments, that fade not with the year, 
A hardy Girl continues to provide ; 
Who, mounting fearlessly the rocky heights, 
Her Father's prompt attendant, does for him 
All that a boy could do, but with delight 
More keen and prouder daring ; yet hath she, 
Within the garden, like the rest, a bed 
For her own flowers and favourite herbs, a space, 
By sacred charter, holden for her use. 
— These, and whatever else the garden bears 
Of fruit or flower, permission asked or not, 
I freely gather ; and my leisure draws 
A not unfrequent pastime from the hum 

Of bees around their range of sheltered hives 
Busy in that enclosure ; while the rill, 
That sparkling thrids the rocks, attunes his voice 
To the pure course of human life which there 
Flows on in solitude. But, when the gloom 
Of night is falling round my steps, then most 
This Dwelling charms me ; often I stop short, 
(Who could refrain ?) and feed by stealth my sight 
With prospect of the company within, 
Laid open through the blazing window : — there 
I see the eldest Daughter at her wheel 
Spinning amain, as if to overtake 
The never-halting time ; or, in her turn, 
Teaching some Novice of the sisterhood 
That skill in this or other household work, 
Which, from her Father's honoured hand, herself, 
While she was yet a little-one, had learned. 
Mild Man ! he is not gay, but they are gay ; 
And the whole house seems filled with gaiety. 
— Thrice happy, then, the Mother may be deemed, 
The Wife, from whose consolatory grave 
I turned, that ye in mind might witness where, 
And how, her Spirit yet survives on earth ! " 


BOOK SEVENTH. 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE 
MOUNTAINS 

CONTINUED. 

ARGUMENT. 
Impression of these Narratives upon the Author's, mind 
— Pastor invited to give account of certain Graves that 
lie apart— Clergyman and his Family— Fortunate 
influence of change of situation — Activity in extreme 
old age — Another Clergyman, a character of resolute 
Virtue — Lamentations over mis-directed applause — 
Instance of less exalted excellence in a deaf man — 
Elevated character of a blind man— Reflection upon 
Blindness— Interrupted by a Peasant who passes — 
his animal cheerfulness and careless vivacity — He 
occasions a digression on the fall of beautiful and in- 
teresting Trees— A female Infant's Grave— Joy at her 
Birth— Sorrow at her Departure— A youthful Peasant 
— his patriotic enthusiasm and distinguished qualities 
—his untimely death— Exultation of the Wanderer, 
as a patriot, in this Picture— Solitary how affected- 
Monument of a Knight— Traditions concerning him — 
Peroration of the Wanderer on the transitoriness of 
things and the revolutions of society— Hints at his 
own past Calling —Thanks the Pastor. 

While thus from theme to theme the Historian 

The words he uttered, and the scene that lay 
Before our eyes, awakened in my mind 
Vivid remembrance of those long-past hours ; 
When, in the hollow of some shadowy vale, 
(What time the splendour of the setting sun 
Lay beautiful on Snowdon's sovereign brow, 
On Cader Idris, or huge Penmanmaur) 
A wandering Youth, I listened with delight 
To pastoral melody or warlike air, 
Drawn from the chords of the ancient British harp 
By some accomplished Master, while he sate 
Amid the quiet of the green recess, 
And there did inexhaustibly dispense 
An interchange of soft or solemn tunes, 
Tender or blithe ; now, as the varying mood 
Of his own spirit urged, — now, as a voice 
From youth or maiden, or some honoured chief 
Of his compatriot villagers (that hung 
Around him, drinking in the impassioned notes 
Of the time-hallowed minsfrelsy) required 
For their heart's ease or pleasure. Strains of power 

THE CHURCH- YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

Were they, to seize and occupy the sense ; 
But to a higher mark than song can reach 
Rose this pure eloquence. And, when the stream 
Which overflowed the soul was passed away, 
A consciousness remained that it had left, 
Deposited upon the silent shore 
Of memory, images and precious thoughts, 
That shall not die, and cannot be destroyed. 
" These grassy heaps lie amicably close," 
Said I, " like surges heaving in the wind 
Along the surface of a mountain pool : 
Whence comes it, then, that yonder we behold 
Five graves, and only five, that rise together 
Unsociably sequestered, and encroaching 
On the smooth play-ground of the village-school ? " 
The Vicar answered, — " No disdainful pride 
In them who rest beneath, nor any course 
Of strange or tragic accident, hath helped 
To place those hillocks in that lonely guise. 
• — Once more look forth, and follow with your sight 
The length of road that from yon mountain's base 
Through bare enclosures stretches, 'till its line 
Is lost within a little tuft of trees ; 
Then, reappearing in a moment, quits 
The cultured fields ; and up the heathy waste, 
Mounts, as you see, in mazes serpentine, 
Led towards an easy outlet of the vale. 
That little shady spot, that sylvan tuft, 
By which the road is hidden, also hides 
A cottage from our view ; though I discern 
(Ye scarcely can) amid its sheltering trees 
The smokeless chimney-top. — 
All unembowered 
And naked stood that lowly Parsonage 
(For such in truth it is, and appertains 
To a small Chapel in the vale beyond) 
When hither came its last Inhabitant. 
Rough and forbidding were the choicest roads 
By which our northern wilds could then be crossed; 
And into most of these secluded vales 
Was no access for wain, heavy or light. 
So, at his dwelling-place the Priest arrived 
With store of household goods, in panniers slung 
On sturdy horses graced with jingling beUs, 
And on the back of more ignoble beast ; 
That, with like burthen of effects most prized 
Or easiest carried, closed the motley train. 
Young was I then, a school-boy of eight years ; 
But still, methinks, I see them as they passed 
In order, drawing toward their wished-for home. 
— Rocked by the motion of a trusty ass 
Two ruddy children hung, a well-poised freight, 

Each in his basket nodding drowsily ; 
Their bonnets, I remember, wreathed with flowers, 
Which told it was the pleasant month of June ; 
And, close behind, the comely Matron rode, 
A woman of soft speech and gracious smile, 
And with a lady's mien. — From far they came, 
Even from Northumbrian hills; yet theirs had 
been 
A merry journey, rich in pastime, cheered 
By music, prank, and laughter-stirring jest ; 
And freak put on, and arch word dropped — to 
swell 
The cloud of fancy and uncouth surmise 
That gathered round the slowly-moving train. 
— f Whence do they come ? and with what errand 
charged ? 
' Belong they to the fortune-telling tribe 
' Who pitch their tents under the green- wood tree? 
' Or Strollers are they, furnished to enact 
' Fair Rosamond, and the Children of the Wood, 
' And, by that whiskered tabby's aid, set forth 
 The lucky venture of sage Whittington, 
 When the next village hears the show announced 
' By blast of trumpet ? ' Plenteous was the growth 
Of such conjectures, overheard, or seen 
On many a staring countenance portrayed 
Of boor or burgher, as they marched along. 
And more than once their steadiness of face 
Was put to proof, and exercise supplied 
To their inventive humour, by stern looks, 
And questions in authoritative tone, 
From some staid guardian of the public peace, 
Checking the sober steed on which he rode, 
In his suspicious wisdom ; oftener still, 
By notice indirect, or blunt demand 
From traveller halting in his own despite, 
A simple curiosity to ease : 
Of which adventures, that beguiled and cheered 
Their grave migration, the good pair would tell, 
With undiminished glee, in hoary age. 
A Priest he was by function ; but his course 
From his youth up, and high as manhood's noon, 
(The hour of life to which he then was brought) 
Had been irregular, I might say, wild ; 
By books unsteadied, by his pastoral care 
Too little checked. An active, ardent mind ; 
A fancy pregnant with resource and scheme 
To cheat the sadness of a rainy day ; 
Hands apt for all ingenious arts and games ; 
A generous spirit, and a body strong 
To cope with stoutest champions of the bowl ; 
Had earned for him sure welcome, and the rights 
Of a prized visitant, in the jolly hall 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Of country 'squire ; or at the statelier board 
Of duke or earl, from scenes of courtly pomp 
Withdrawn,— to while away the summer hours 
In condescension among rural guests. 
With these high comrades he had revelled long, 
Frolicked industriously, a simple Clerk 
By hopes of coming patronage beguiled 
Till the heart sickened. So, each loftier aim 
Abandoning and all his showy friends. 
For a life's stay (slender it was, but sure) 
He turned to this secluded chapelry ; 
That had been offered to his doubtful choice 
By an unthought-of patron. Bleak and bare 
They found the cottage, their allotted home ; 
Naked without, and rude within ; a spot 
With which the Cure not long had been endowed : 
And far remote the chapel stood, — remote, 
And, from his Dwelling, unapproachable, 
Save through a gap high in the hills, an opening 
Shadeless and shelterless, by driving showers 
Frequented, and beset with howling winds. 
Yet cause was none, whate'er regret might hang 
On his own mind, to quarrel with the choice 
Or the necessity that fixed him here ; 
Apart from old temptations, and constrained 
To punctual labour in his sacred charge. 
See him a constant preacher to the poor ! 
And visiting, though not with saintly zeal, 
Yet, when need was, with no reluctant will, 
The sick in body, or distrest in mind ; 
And, by as salutary change, compelled 
To rise from timely sleep, and meet the day 
With no engagement, in his thoughts, more proud 
Or splendid than his garden could afford, 
His fields, or mountains by the heath-cock ranged, 
Or the wild brooks ; from which he now returned 
Contented to partake the quiet meal 
Of his own board, where sat his gentle Mate 
And three fair Children, plentifully fed 
Though simply, from their little household farm ; 
Nor wanted timely treat of fish or fowl 
By nature yielded to his practised hand ; — 
To help the small but certain comings-in 
Of that spare benefice. Yet not the less 
Theirs was a hospitable board, and theirs 
A charitable door. 
So days and years 
Passed on ; — the inside of that rugged house 
Was trimmed and brightened by the Matron's care, 
And gradually enriched with things of price, 
Which might be lacked for use or ornament. 
What, though no soft and costly sofa there 
Insidiously stretched out its lazy length, 

And no vain mirror glittered upon the walls, 
Yet were the windows of the low abode 
By shutters weather-fended, which at once 
Repelled the storm and deadened its loud roar. 
There snow-white curtains hung in decent folds ; 
Tough moss, and long-enduring mountain plants, 
That creep along the ground with sinuous trail, 
Were nicely braided ; and composed a work 
Like Indian mats, that with appropriate grace 
Lay at the threshold and the inner doors ; 
And a fair carpet, woven of homespun wool 
But tinctured daintily with florid hues, 
For seemliness and warmth, on festal days, 
Covered the smooth blue slabs of mountain-stone 
With which the parlour-floor, in simplest guise 
Of pastoral homesteads, had been long inlaid. 
Those pleasing works the Housewife's skill 
produced : 
Meanwhile the unsedentary Master's hand 
Was busier with his task — to rid, to plant, 
To rear for food, for shelter, and delight ; 
A thriving covert ! And when wishes, formed 
In youth, and sanctioned by the riper mind, 
Restored me to my native valley, here 
To end my days ; well pleased was I to see 
The once-bare cottage, on the mountain-side, 
Screen'd from assault of every bitter blast ; 
While the dark shadows of the summer leaves 
Danced in the breeze, chequering its mossy roof. 
Time, which had thus afforded willing help 
To beautify with nature's fairest growths 
This rustic tenement, had gently shed, 
Upon its Master's frame, a wintry grace ; 
The comeliness of unenfeebled age. 
But how could I say, gently ? for he still 
Retained a flashing eye, a burning palm, 
A stirring foot, a head which beat at nights 
Upon its pillow with a thousand schemes. 
Few likings had he dropped, few pleasures lost; 
Generous and charitable, prompt to serve ; 
And still his harsher passions kept their hold — 
Anger and indignation. Still he loved 
The sound of titled names, and talked in glee 
Of long-past banquetings with high-born friends : 
Then, from those lulling fits of vain delight 
Uproused by recollected injury, railed 
At their false ways disdainfully, — and oft 
In bitterness, and with a threatening eye 
Of fire, incensed beneath its hoary brow. 
— Those transports, with staid looks of pure good- 
will, 
And with soft smile, his consort would reprove. 

THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

She, far behind him in the race of years, 
Yet keeping her first mildness, was advanced 
Far nearer, in the habit of her soul, 
To that still region whither all are bound. 
Him might we liken to the setting sun 
As seen not seldom on some gusty day, 
Struggling and bold, and shining from the west 
With an inconstant and unmellowed light ; 
She was a soft attendant cloud, that hung 
As if with wish to veil the restless orb ; 
From which it did itself imbibe a ray 
Of pleasing lustre. — But no more of this ; 
I better love to sprinkle on the sod 
That now divides the pair, or rather say, 
That still unites them, praises, like heaven's dew, 
Without reserve descending upon both. 
Our very first in eminence of years 
This old Man stood, the patriarch of the Vale ! 
And, to his unmolested mansion, death 
Had never come, through space of forty years ; 
Sparing both old and young in that abode. 
Suddenly then they disappeared : not twice 
Had summer scorched the fields ; not twice had 
fallen, 
On those high peaks, the first autumnal snow, 
Before the greedy visiting was closed, 
And the long-privileged house left empty — swept 
As by a plague. Yet no rapacious plague 
Had been among them ; all was gentle death, 
One after one, with intervals of peace. 
A happy consummation ! an accord 
Sweet, perfect, to be wished for ! save that here 
Was something which to mortal sense might sound 
Like harshness, — that the old grey-headed Sire, 
The oldest, he was taken last, survived 
When the meek Partner of his age, his Son, 
His Daughter, and that late and high-prized gift, 
His little smiling Grandchild, were no more. 
' All gone, all vanished ! he deprived and bare, 
I How will he face the remnant of his life ? 
' What will become of him ? ' we said, and mused 
In sad conjectures — ' Shall we meet him now 
' Haunting with rod and line the craggy brooks ? 
' Or shall we overhear him, as we pass, 
' Striving to entertain the lonely hours 
| With music V (for he had not ceased to touch 
The harp or viol which himself had framed, 
For their sweet purposes, with perfect skill.) 
' What titles will he keep \ will he remain 
' Musician, gardener, builder, mechanist, 
' A planter, and a rearer from the seed ? 
' A man of hope and forward-looking mind 

' Even to the last !' — Such was he, unsubdued. 
But Heaven was gracious ; yet a little while, 
And this Survivor, with his cheerful throng 
Of open projects, and his inward hoard 
Of unsunned griefs, too many and too keen, 
Was overcome by unexpected sleep, 
In one blest moment. Like a shadow thrown 
Softly and lightly from a passing cloud, 
Death fell upon him, while reclined he lay 
For noontide solace on the summer grass, 
The warm lap of his mother earth : and so, 
Their lenient term of separation past, 
That family (whose graves you there behold) 
By yet a higher privilege once more 
Were gathered to each other." 
Calm of mind 
And silence waited on these closing words ; 
Until the Wanderer (whether moved by fear 
Lest in those passages of life were some 
That might have touched the sick heart of his Friend 
Too nearly, or intent to reinforce 
His own firm spirit in degree deprest 
By tender sorrow for our mortal state) 
Thus silence broke : — " Behold a thoughtless Man 
From vice and premature decay preserved 
By useful habits, to a fitter soil 
Transplanted ere too late. — The hermit, lodged 
Amid the untrodden desert, tells his beads, 
With each repeating its allotted prayer 
And thus divides and thus relieves the time ; 
Smooth task, with his compared, whose mind could 
string, 
Not scantily, bright minutes on the thread 
Of keen domestic anguish ; and beguile 
A solitude, unchosen, unprofessed ; 
Till gentlest death released him. 
Far from us 
Be the desire — too curiously to ask 
How much of this is but the blind result 
Of cordial spirits and vital temperament, 
And what to higher powers is justly due. 
But you, Sir, know that in a neighbouring vale 
A Priest abides before whose life such doubts 
Fall to the ground ; whose gifts of nature lie 
Retired from notice, lost in attributes 
Of reason, honourably effaced by debts 
Which her poor treasure-house is content to owe, 
And conquests over her dominion gained, 
To which her frowardness must needs submit. 
In this one Man is shown a temperance — proof 
Against all trials ; industry severe 
And constant as the motion of the day ; 
Stern self-denial round him spread, with shade 
That might be deemed forbidding, did not there 
QQ 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

All generous feelings flourish and rejoice ; 
Forbearance, charity in deed and thought, 
And resolution competent to take 
Out of the bosom of simplicity- 
All that her holy customs recommend, 
And the best ages of the world prescribe. 
— Preaching, administering, in every work 
Of his sublime vocation, in the walks 
Of worldly intercourse between man and man, 
And in his humble dwelling, he appears 
A labourer, with moral virtue girt, 
With spiritual graces, like a glory, crowned." 
" Doubt can be none," the Pastor said, " for 
whom 
This portraiture is sketched. The great, the good, 
The well-beloved, the fortunate, the wise, — 
These titles emperors and chiefs have borne, 
Honour assumed or given : and him, the Wonderful, 
Our simple shepherds, speaking from the heart, 
Deservedly have styled. — From his abode 
In a dependent chapelry that lies 
Behind yon hill, a poor and rugged wild, 
Which in his soul he lovingly embraced, 
And, having once espoused, would never quit ; 
Into its graveyard will ere long be borne 
That lowly, great, good Man. A simple stone 
May cover him ; and by its help, perchance, 
A century shall hear his name pronounced, 
With images attendant on the sound ; 
Then, shall the slowly-gathering twilight close 
In utter night ; and of his course remain 
No cognizable vestiges, no more 
Than of this breath, winch shapes itself in words 
To speak of him, and instantly dissolves. " 
The Pastor pressed by thoughts which round his 
theme 
Still linger' d, after a brief pause, resumed ; 
" Noise is there not enough in doleful war, 
But that the heaven-born poet must stand forth, 
And lend the echoes of his sacred shell, 
To multiply and aggravate the din ? 
Pangs are there not enough in hopeless love — 
And, in requited passion, all too much 
Of turbulence, anxiety, and fear — 
But that the minstrel of the rural shade 
Must tune his pipe, insidiously to nurse 
The perturbation in the suffering breast, 
And propagate its kind, far as he may  
— Ah who (and with such rapture as befits 
The hallowed theme) will rise and celebrate 
The good man's purposes and deeds ; retrace 
His struggles, his discomfitures deplore, 

His triumphs hail, and glorify his end; 
That virtue, like the fumes and vapoury clouds 
Through fancy's heat redounding in the brain, 
And like the soft infections of the heart, 
By charm of measured words may spread o'er field, 
Hamlet, and town ; and piety survive 
Upon the lips of men in hall or bower ; 
Not for reproof, but high and warm delight, 
And grave encouragement, by song inspired ? 
— Vain thought ! but wherefore murmur or repine? 
The memory of the just survives in heaven : 
And, without sorrow, will the ground receive 
That venerable clay. Meanwhile the best 
Of what lies here confines us to degrees 
In excellence less difficult to reach, 
And milder worth : nor need we travel far 
From those to whom our last regards were paid, 
For such example. 
Almost at the root 
Of that tall pine, the shadow of whose bare 
And slender stem, while here I sit at eve, 
Oft stretches toward me, like a long straight path 
Traced faintly in the greensward ; there, beneath 
A plain blue stone, a gentle Dalesman lies, 
From whom, in early childhood, was withdrawn 
The precious gift of hearing. He grew up 
From year to year in loneliness of soul ; 
And this deep mountain- valley was to him 
Soundless, with all its streams. The bird of dawn 
Did never rouse this Cottager from sleep 
With startling summons ; not for his delight 
The vernal cuckoo shouted ; not for him 
Murmured the labouring bee. When stormy winds 
Were working the broad bosom of the lake 
Into a thousand thousand sparkling waves, 
Rocking the trees, or driving cloud on cloud 
Along the sharp edge of yon lofty crags, 
The agitated scene before his eye 
Was silent as a picture : evermore 
Were all things silent, wheresoe'er he moved. 
Yet, by the solace of his own pure thoughts 
Upheld, he duteously pursued the round 
Of rural labours ; the steep mountain-side 
Ascended, with his staff and faithful dog ; 
The plough he guided, and the scythe he swayed ; 
And the ripe corn before his sickle fell 
Among the jocund reapers. For himself, 
All watchful and industrious as he was, 
He wrought not : neither field nor flock he owned: 
No wish for wealth had place within his mind ; 
Nor husband's love, nor father's hope or care. 
Though born a younger brother, need was none 
That from the floor of his paternal home 

THE CHURCH- YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

He should depart, to plant himself anew. 
And when, mature in manhood, he beheld 
His parents laid in earth, no loss ensued 
Of rights to him ; but he remained well pleased, 
By the pure bond of independent love, 
An inmate of a second family ; 
The fellow-labourer and friend of him 
To whom the small inheritance had fallen. 
— Nor deem that his mild presence was a weight 
That pressed upon his brother's house ; for books 
Were ready comrades whom he could not tire ; 
Of whose society the blameless Man 
Was never satiate. Their familiar voice, 
Even to old age, with unabated charm 
Beguiled his leisure hours ; refreshed his thoughts ; 
Beyond its natural elevation raised 
His introverted spirit ; and bestowed 
Upon his life an outward dignity 
Which all acknowledged. The dark winter night, 
The stormy day, each had its own resource ; 
Song of the muses, sage historic tale, 
Science severe, or word of holy Writ 
Announcing immortality and joy 
To the assembled spirits of just men 
Made perfect, and from injury secure. 
— Thus soothed at home, thus busy in the field, 
To no perverse suspicion he gave way, 
No languor, peevishness, nor vain complaint : 
And they, who were about him, did not fail 
In reverence, or in courtesy ; they prized 
His gentle manners : and his peaceful smiles, 
The gleams of his slow- varying countenance, 
Were met with answering sympathy and love. 
At length, when sixty years and five were told, 
A slow disease insensibly consumed 
The powers of nature : and a few short steps 
Of friends and kindred bore him from his home 
(Yon cottage shaded by the woody crags) 
To the profounder stillness of the grave. 
— Nor was his funeral denied the grace 
Of many tears, virtuous and thoughtful grief ; 
Heart-sorrow rendered sweet by gratitude. 
And now that monumental stone preserves 
His name, and unambitiously relates 
How long, and by what kindly outward aids, 
And in what pure contentedness of mind, 
The sad privation was by him endured. 
— And yon tall pine-tree, whose composing sound 
Was wasted on the good Man's living ear, 
Hath now its own peculiar sanctity ; 
And, at the touch of every wandering breeze, 
Murmurs, not idly, o'er his peaceful grave. 

Soul-cheering Light, most bountiful of things ! 
Guide of our way, mysterious comforter ! 
Whose sacred influence, spread through earth and 
heaven, 
We all too thanklessly participate, 
Thy gifts were utterly withheld from him 
Whose place of rest is near yon ivied porch. 
Yet, of the wild brooks ask if he complained ; 
Ask of the channelled rivers if they held 
A safer, easier, more determined, course. 
What terror doth it strike into the mind 
To think of one, blind and alone, advancing 
Straight toward some precipice's airy brink ! 
But, timely warned, He would have stayed Ms steps, 
Protected, say enlightened, by his ear ; 
And on the very edge of vacancy 
Not more endangered than a man whose eye 
Beholds the gulf beneath. — No floweret blooms 
Throughout the lofty range of these rough hills, 
Nor in the woods, that could from him conceal 
Its birth-place ; none whose figure did not live 
Upon his touch. The bowels of the earth 
Enriched with knowledge his industrious mind ; 
The ocean paid him tribute from the stores 
Lodged in her bosom ; and, by science led, 
His genius mounted to the plains of heaven. 
— Methinks I see. him— how his eye-balls rolled, 
Beneath his ample brow, in darkness paired, — 
But each instinct with spirit ; and the frame 
Of the whole countenance alive with thought, 
Fancy, and understanding ; while the voice 
Discoursed of natural or moral truth 
With eloquence, and such authentic power, 
That, in his presence, humbler knowledge stood 
Abashed, and tender pity overawed." 
"A noble — and, to unreflecting minds, 
A marvellous spectacle," the Wanderer said, 
"Beings like these present ! But proof abounds 
Upon the earth that faculties, which seem 
Extinguished, do not, therefore, cease to be. 
And to the mind among her powers of sense 
This transfer is permitted, — not alone 
That the bereft their recompense may win ; 
But for remoter purposes of love 
And charity ; nor last nor least for this, 
That to the imagination may be given 
A type and shadow of an awful truth ; 
How, likewise, under sufferance divine, 
Darkness is banished from the realms of death, 
By man's imperishable spirit, quelled. 
Unto the men who see not as we see 
Futurity was thought, in ancient times, 
To be laid open, and they prophesied. 

.  

THE EXCURSION. 

And know we not that from the blind have flowed 
The highest, holiest, raptures of the lyre; 
And wisdom married to immortal verse ? " 
Among the humbler Worthies, at our feet 
Lying insensible to human praise, 
Love, or regret, — whose lineaments would next 
Have been portrayed, I guess not ; but it chanced 
That, near the quiet church-yard where we sate, 
A team of horses, with a ponderous freight 
Pressing behind, adown a rugged slope, 
Whose sharp descent confounded their array, 
Came at that moment, ringing noisily. 
"Here," said the Pastor, " do we muse, and mourn 
The waste of death ; and lo ! the giant oak 
Stretched on his bier — that massy timber wain ; 
Nor fail to note the Man who guides the team." 
He was a peasant of the lowest class : 
Grey locks profusely round his temples hung 
In clustering curls, like ivy, which the bite 
Of winter cannot thin ; the fresh air lodged 
Within his cheek, as light within a cloud; 
And he returned our greeting with a smile. 
When he had passed, the Solitary spake ; 
" A Man he seems of cheerful yesterdays 
And confident to-morrows ; with a face 
Not worldly-minded, for it bears too much 
Of Nature's impress, — gaiety and health, 
Freedom and hope ; but keen, withal, and shrewd. 
His gestures note, — and hark ! his tones of voice 
Are all vivacious as his mien and looks." 
The Pastor answered. " You have read him well. 
Year after year is added to his store 
With silent increase : summers, winters — past, 
Past or to come ; yea, boldly might I say, 
Ten summers and ten winters of a space 
That lies beyond life's ordinary bounds, 
Upon his sprightly vigour cannot fix 
The obligation of an anxious mind, 
A pride in having, or a fear to lose ; 
Possessed like outskirts of some large domain, 
By any one more thought of than by him 
Who holds the land in fee, its careless lord ! 
Yet is the creature rational, endowed 
With foresight ; hears, too, every sabbath day, 
The christian promise with attentive ear ; 
Nor will, I trust, the Majesty of Heaven 
Reject the incense offered up by him, 
Though of the kind which beasts and birds present 
In grove or pasture ; cheerfulness of soul, 
From trepidation and repining free. 

How many scrupulous worshippers fall down 
Upon their knees, and daily homage pay 
Less worthy, less religious even, than his ! 
This qualified respect, the old Man's due, 
Is paid without reluctance ; but in truth," 
(Said the good Vicar with a fond half-smile) 
" I feel at times a motion of despite 
Towards one, whose bold contrivances and skill, 
As you have seen, bear such conspicuous part 
In works of havoc ; taking from these vales, 
One after one, their proudest ornaments. 
Full oft his doings leave me to deplore 
Tall ash-tree, sown by winds, by vapours nursed, 
In the dry crannies of the pendent rocks ; 
Light birch, aloft upon the horizon's edge, 
A veil of glory for the ascending moon ; 
And oak whose roots by noontide dew were damped, 
And on whose forehead inaccessible 
The raven lodged in safety. — Many a ship 
Launched into Morecamb-bay, to Mm hath owed 
Her strong knee-timbers, and the mast that bears 
The loftiest of her pendants ; He, from park 
Or forest, fetched the enormous axle-tree 
That whirls (howslow itself !) ten thousand spindles: 
And the vast engine labouring in the mine, 
Content with meaner prowess, must have lacked 
The trunk and body of its marvellous strength, 
If his undaunted enterprise had failed 
Among the mountain coves. 
Yon household fir, 
A guardian planted to fence off the blast, 
But towering high the roof above, as if 
Its humble destination were forgot — 
That sycamore, which annually holds 
Within its shade, as in a stately tent 
On all sides open to the fanning breeze, 
A grave assemblage, seated while they shear 
The fleece-encumbered flock — the Joyful Elm, 
Around whose trunk the maidens dance in May — 
And the Lord's Oak — would plead their several 
In vain, if he were master of their fate ; [rights 
His sentence to the axe would doom them all. 
But, green in age and lusty as he is, 
And promising to keep his hold on earth 
Less, as might seem, in rivalship with men 
Than with the forest's more enduring growth, 
His own appointed hour will come at last ; 
And, like the haughty Spoilers of the world, 
This keen Destroyer, in his turn, must fall. 
Now from the living pass we once again : 
From Age," the Priest continued, " turn your 
thoughts ; 

THE CHURCH- YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

From Age, that often unlamented drops, 
And mark that daisied hillock, three spans long ! 
— Seven lusty Sons sate daily round the hoard 
Of Gold-rill side ; and, when the hope had ceased 
Of other progeny, a Daughter then 
Was given, the crowning bounty of the whole ; 
And so acknowledged with a tremulous joy 
Felt to the centre of that heavenly calm 
With which by nature every mother's soul 
Is stricken in the moment when her throes 
Are ended, and her ears have heard the cry 
Which tells her that a living child is born ; 
And she lies conscious, in a blissful rest, 
That the dread storm is weathered by them both. 
The Father — him at this unlooked-for gift 
A bolder transport seizes. From the side 
Of his bright hearth, and from his open door, 
Day after day the gladness is diffused 
To all that come, almost to all that pass ; 
Invited, summoned, to partake the cheer 
Spread on the never-empty board, and drink 
Health and good wishes to his new-born girl, 
From cups replenished by his joyous hand. 
— Those seven fair brothers variously were moved 
Each by the thoughts best suited to his years : 
But most of all and with most thankful mind 
The hoary grandsire felt himself enriched ; 
A happiness that ebbed not, but remained 
To fill the total measure of his soul ! 
— From the low tenement, his own abode, 
Whither, as to a little private cell, 
He had withdrawn from bustle, care, and noise, 
To spend the sabbath of old age in peace, 
Once every day he duteously repaired 
To rock the cradle of the slumbering babe : 
For in that female infant's name he heard 
The silent name of his departed wife ; 
Heart-stirring music ! hourly heard that name ; 
Full blest he was, ' Another Margaret Green,' 
Oft did he say, ' was come to Gold-rill side.' 
Oh ! pang unthought of, as the precious boon 
Itself had been unlooked-for ; oh ! dire stroke 
Of desolating anguish for them all ! 
— Just as the Child could totter on the floor, 
And, by some friendly finger's help upstayed, 
Range round the garden walk, while she perchance 
Was catching at some novelty of spring, 
Ground-flower, or glossy insect from its cell 
Drawn by the sunshine — at that hopeful season 
The winds of March, smiting insidiously, 
Raised in the tender passage of the throat 
Viewless obstruction ; whence, all unforewarned, 

The household lost their pride and soul's delight. 
— But time hath power to soften all regrets, 
And prayer and thought can bring to worst distress 
Due resignation. Therefore, though some tears 
Fail not to spring from either Parent's eye 
Oft as they hear of sorrow like their own, 
Yet this departed Little-one, too long 
The innocent troubler of their quiet, sleeps 
In what may now be called a peaceful bed. 
On a bright day — so calm and bright, it seemed 
To us, with our sad spirits, heavenly-fair — 
These mountains echoed to an unknown sound ; 
A volley, thrice repeated o'er the Corse 
Let down into the hollow of that grave, 
Whose shelving sides are red with naked mould. 
Ye rains of April, duly wet this earth ! 
Spare, burning sun of midsummer, these sods, 
That they may knit together, and therewith 
Our thoughts unite in kindred quietness ! 
Nor so the Valley shall forget her loss. 
Dear Youth, by young and old alike beloved, 
To me as precious as my own ! — Green herbs 
May creep (I wish that they would softly creep) 
Over thy last abode, and we may pass 
Reminded less imperiously of thee ; — 
The ridge itself may sink into the breast 
Of earth, the great abyss, and be no more ; 
Yet shall not thy remembrance leave our hearts, 
Thy image disappear ! 
The Mountain-ash 
No eye can overlook, when 'mid a grove 
Of yet unfaded trees she lifts her head 
Decked with autumnal berries, that outshine 
Spring's richest blossoms ; and ye may have marked,' 
By a brook-side or solitary tarn, 
How she her station doth adorn : the pool 
Glows at her feet, and all the gloomy rocks 
Are brightened round her. In his native vale 
Such and so glorious did this Youth appear ; 
A sight that kindled pleasure in all hearts 
By his ingenuous beauty, by the gleam 
Of his fair eyes, by his capacious brow, 
By all the graces with which nature's hand 
Had lavishly arrayed him. As old bards 
Tell in their idle songs of wandering gods, 
Pan or Apollo, veiled in human form : 
Yet, like the sweet-breathed violet of the shade 
Discovered in their own despite to sense 
Of mortals (if such fables without blame 
May find chance-mention on this sacred ground) 
So, through a simple rustic garb's disguise, 
And through the impediment of rural cares, 
In him revealed a scholar's genius shone ; 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

And so, not wholly hidden from men's sight, 
In him the spirit of a hero walked 
Our unpretending valley. — How the quoit 
Whizzed from the Stripling's arm ! If touched by 
him, 
The inglorious foot-ball mounted to the pitch 
Of the lark's flight, — or shaped a rainbow curve, 
Aloft, in prospect of the shouting field ! 
The indefatigable fox had learned 
To dread his perseverance in the chase. 
With admiration would he lift his eyes 
To the wide-ruling eagle, and his hand 
Was loth to assault the majesty he loved : 
Else had the strongest fastnesses proved weak 
To guard the royal brood. The sailing glead, 
The wheeling swallow, and the darting snipe. 
The sportive sea-gull dancing with the waves, 
And cautious water-fowl, from distant climes, 
Fixed at their seat, the centre of the Mere, 
Were subject to young Oswald's steady aim, 
And lived by his forbearance. 
From the coast 
Of France a boastful Tyrant hurled his threats ; 
Our Country marked the preparation vast 
Of hostile forces ; and she called — with voice 
That filled her plains, that reached her utmost 
shores, 
And in remotest vales was heard — to arms ! 
— Then, for the first time, here you might have seen 
The shepherd's grey to martial scarlet changed, 
That flashed uncouthly through the woods and fields. 
Ten hardy Striplings, all in bright attire, 
And graced with shining weapons, weekly marched, 
From this lone valley, to a central spot 
Where, in assemblage with the flower and choice 
Of the surrounding district, they might learn 
The rudiments of war ; ten — hardy, strong, 
And valiant; but young Oswald, like a chief 
And yet a modest comrade, led them forth 
From their shy solitude, to face the world, 
With a gay confidence and seemly pride ; 
Measuring the soil beneath their happy feet 
Like Youths released from labour, and yet bound 
To most laborious service, though to them 
A festival of unencumbered ease ; 
The inner spirit keeping holiday, 
Like vernal ground to sabbath sunshine left. 
Oft have I marked him, at some leisure hour, 
Stretched on the grass, or seated in the shade, 
Among his fellows, while an ample map 
Before their eyes lay carefully outspread, 
From which the gallant teacher would discourse, 
Now pointing this way, and now that. — ' Here flows,' 

Thus would he say, ' The Rhine, that famous 
stream ! 
 Eastward, the Danube toward this inland sea, 
' A mightier river, winds from realm to realm ; 
' And, like a serpent, shows his glittering back 
' Bespotted — with innumerable isles : 
' Here reigns the Russian, there the Turk ; observe 
' His capital city ! ' Thence, along a tract 
Of livelier interest to his hopes and fears, 
His finger moved, distinguishing the spots 
Where wide-spread conflict then most fiercely raged ; 
Nor left unstigmatized those fatal fields 
On which the sons of mighty Germany 
Were taught a base submission. — £ Here behold 
' A nobler race, the Switzers, and their land, 
' Vales deeper far than these of ours, huge woods, 
' And mountains white with everlasting snow ! ' 
— And, surely, he, that spake with kindling brow, 
Was a true patriot, hopeful as the best 
Of that young peasantry, who, in our days, 
Have fought and perished for Helvetia's rights — 
Ah, not in vain ! — or those who, in old time, 
For work of happier issue, to the side 
Of Tell came trooping from a thousand huts, 
When he had risen alone ! No braver Youth 
Descended from Judean heights, to march 
With righteous Joshua ; nor appeared in arms 
When grove was felled, and altar was cast down, 
And Gideon blew the trumpet, soul-inflamed, 
And strong in hatred of idolatry." 

The Pastor, even as if by these last words 
Raised from his seat within the chosen shade, 
Moved toward the grave ; — instinctively his steps 
We followed ; and my voice with joy exclaimed: 
" Power to the Oppressors of the world is given, 
A might of which they dream not. Oh ! the curse, 
To be the awakener of divinest thoughts, 
Father and founder of exalted deeds ; 
And, to whole nations bound in servile straits, 
The liberal donor of capacities 
More than heroic ! this to be, nor yet 
Have sense of one connatural wish, nor yet 
Deserve the least return of human thanks ; 
Winning no recompense but deadly hate 
With pity mixed, astonishment with scorn ! " 
When this involuntary strain had ceased, 
The Pastor said : " So Providence is served ; 
The forked weapon of the skies can send 
Illumination into deep, dark holds, 
Which the mild sunbeam hath not power to pierce. 
Ye Thrones that have defied remorse, and cast 
Pity away, soon shall ye quake with/ea?'/ 



THE CHURCH-YARD AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

 

For, not unconscious of the mighty debt 
Which to outrageous wrong the sufferer owes, 
Europe, through all her habitable bounds, 
Is thirsting for their overthrow, who yet 
Survive, as pagan temples stood of yore, 
By horror of their impious rites, preserved ; 
Are still permitted to extend their pride, 
Like cedars on the top of Lebanon 
Darkening the sun. 
But less impatient thoughts, 
And love ' all hoping and expecting all,' 
This hallowed grave demands, where rests in peace 
A humble champion of the better cause ; 
A Peasant-youth, so call him, for he asked 
No higher name ; in whom our country showed, 
As in a favourite son, most beautiful. 
In spite of vice, and misery, and disease, 
Spread with the spreading of her wealthy arts, 
England, the ancient and the free, appeared 
In him to stand before my swimming eyes, 
Unconquerably virtuous and secure. 
— No more of this, lest I offend his dust : 
Short was his life, and a brief tale remains. 
One day — a summer's day of annual pomp 
And solemn chase — from morn to sultry noon 
His steps had followed, fleetest of the fleet, 
The red-deer driven along its native heights 
With cry of hound and horn ; and, from that toil 
Returned with sinews weakened and relaxed, 
This generous Youth, too negligent of self, 
Plunged — 'mid a gay and busy throng convened 
To wash the fleeces of his Father's flock — 
Into the chilling flood. Convulsions dire [space 
Seized him, that self-same night ; and through the 
Of twelve ensuing days his frame was wrenched, 
Till nature rested from her work in death. 
To him, thus snatched away, his comrades paid 
A soldier's honours. At his funeral hour 
Bright was the sun, the sky a cloudless blue — 
A golden lustre slept upon the hills ; 
And if by chance a stranger, wandering there, 
From some commanding eminence had looked 
Down on this spot, well pleased would he have seen 
A glittering spectacle ; but every face 
Was pallid : seldom hath that eye been moist 
With tears, that wept not then ; nor were the few, 
Who from their dwellings came not forth to join 
In this sad service, less disturbed than we. 
They started at the tributary peal 
Of instantaneous thunder, which announced, 
Through the still air, the closing of the Grave ; 
And distant mountains echoed with a sound 
Of lamentation, never heard before ! " 

The Pastor ceased. — My venerable Friend 
Victoriously upraised his clear bright eye ; 
And, when that eulogy was ended, stood 
Enrapt, as if his inward sense perceived 
The prolongation of some still response, 
Sent by the ancient Soul of this wide land, 
The Spirit of its mountains and its seas, 
Its cities, temples, fields, its awful power, 
Its rights and virtues — by that Deity 
Descending, and supporting his pure heart 
With patriotic confidence and joy. 
And, at the last of those memorial words, 
The pining Solitary turned aside ; 
Whether through manly instinct to conceal 
Tender emotions spreading from the heart 
To his worn cheek ; or with uneasy shame 
For those cold humours of habitual spleen 
That, fondly seeking in dispraise of man 
Solace and self-excuse, had sometimes urged 
To self-abuse a not ineloquent tongue. 
— Right toward the sacred Edifice his steps 
Had been directed ; and we saw him now 
Intent upon a monumental stone, 
Whose uncouth form was grafted on the wall, 
Or rather seemed to have grown into the side 
Of the rude pile ; as oft-times trunks of trees, 
Where nature works in wild and craggy spots, 
Are seen incorporate with the living rock — 
To endure for aye. The Vicar, taking note 
Of his employment, with a courteous smile 
Exclaimed — 
"The sagest Antiquarian's eye 
That task would foil ; " then, letting fall his voice 
While he advanced, thus spake : " Tradition tells 
That, in Eliza's golden days, a Knight 
Came on a war-horse sumptuously attired, 
And fixed his home in this sequestered vale. 
'Tis left untold if here he first drew breath, 
Or as a stranger reached this deep recess, 
Unknowing and unknown. A pleasing thought 
I sometimes entertain, that haply bound 
To Scotland's court in service of Ins Queen, 
Or sent on mission to some northern Chief 
Of England's realm, this vale he might have seen 
With transient observation ; and thence caught 
An image fair, which, brightening in his soul 
When joy of war and pride of chivalry 
Languished beneath accumulated years, 
Had power to draw him from the world, resolved 
To make that paradise his chosen home 
To which his peaceful fancy oft had turned. 
Vague thoughts are these ; but, if belief may rest 
Upon unwritten story fondly traced 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

From sire to son, in this obscure retreat 
The Knight arrived, with spear and shield, and borne 
Upon a Charger gorgeously bedecked 
With broidered housings. And the lofty Steed — 
His sole companion, and his faithful friend, 
Whom he, in gratitude, let loose to range 
In fertile pastures — was beheld with eyes 
Of admiration and delightful awe, 
By those untravelled Dalesmen. With less pride, 
Yet free from touch of envious discontent, 
They saw a mansion at his bidding rise, 
Like a bright star, amid the lowly band 
Of their rude homesteads. Here the Warrior dwelt ; 
And, in that mansion, children of his own, 
Or kindred, gathered round him. As a tree 
That falls and disappears, the house is gone ; 
And, through improvidence or want of love 
For ancient worth and honourable things, 
The spear and shield are vanished, which the 
Knight 
Hung in Ins rustic hall. One ivied arch 
Myself have seen, a gateway, last remains 
Of that foundation in domestic care 
Raised by his hands. And now no trace is left 
Of the mild-hearted Champion, save this stone, 
Faithless memorial ! and his family name 
Borne by yon clustering cottages, that sprang 
From out the ruins of his stately lodge : 
These, and the name and title at full length, — 
&it glfretf IttljWfl, with appropriate words 
Accompanied, still extant, in a wreath 
Or posy, girding round the several fronts 
Of three clear-sounding and harmonious bells, 
That in the steeple hang, his pious gift." 
" So fails, so languishes, grows dim, and dies," 
The grey-haired Wanderer pensively exclaimed, 
" All that this world is proud of. From their spheres 
The stars of human glory are cast down ; 
Perish the roses and the flowers of kings, 
Princes, and emperors, and the crowns and palms 
Of all the mighty, withered and consumed ! 
Nor is power given to lowliest innocence 
Long to protect her own. The man himself 
Departs ; and soon is spent the line of those 
Who, in the bodily image, in the mind, 
In heart or soul, in station or pursuit, 
Did most resemble him. Degrees and ranks, 
Fraternities and orders — heaping high 
New wealth upon the burthen of the old, 
And placing trust in privilege confirmed 
And re-confirmed — are scoffed at with a smile 
Of greedy foretaste, from the secret stand 
Of Desolation, aimed : to slow decline 

These yield, and these to sudden overthrow : 
Their virtue, service, happiness, and state 
Expire ; and nature's pleasant robe of green, 
Humanity's appointed shroud, enwraps 
Their monuments and their memory. The vast 
Frame 
Of social nature changes evermore 
Her organs and her members with decay 
Restless, and restless generation, powers 
And functions dying and produced at need,- 
And by this law the mighty whole subsists : 
With an ascent and progress in the main ; 
Yet, oh ! how disproportioned to the hopes 
And expectations of self-flattering min ds ! 

The courteous Knight, whose bones are here 
interred, 
Lived in an age conspicuous as our own 
For strife and ferment in the minds of men ; 
Whence alteration in the forms of things, 
Various and vast. A memorable age ! 
Which did to him assign a pensive lot — 
To linger 'mid the last of those bright clouds 
That, on the steady breeze of honour, sailed 
In long procession calm and beautiful. 
He who had seen his own bright order fade, 
And its devotion gradually decline, 
(While war, relinquishing the lance and shield, 
Her temper changed, and bowed to other laws) 
Had also witnessed, in his morn of life, 
That violent commotion, which o'erthrew, 
In town and city and sequestered glen, 
Altar, and cross, and church of solemn roof, 
And old religious house — pile after pile ; 
And shook their tenants out into the fields, 
Like wild beasts without home ! Their hour was 
come ; 
But why no softening thought of gratitude, 
No just remembrance, scruple, or wise doubt? 
Benevolence is mild ; nor borrows help, 
Save at worst need, from bold impetuous force, 
Fitliest allied to anger and revenge. 
But Human-kind rejoices in the might 
Of mutability ; and airy hopes, 
Dancing around her, hinder and disturb 
Those meditations of the soul that feed 
The retrospective virtues. Festive songs 
Break from the maddened nations at the sight 
Of sudden overthrow ; and cold neglect 
Is the sure consequence of slow decay. 
Even," said the Wanderer, " as that courteous 
Knight, 
Bound by his vow to labour for redress 



__ 

THE PARSONAGE. 

 

Of all who suffer wrong, and to enact 
By sword and lance the law of gentleness, 
(If I may venture of myself to speak, 
Trusting that not incongruously I blend 
Low things with lofty) I too shall be doomed 
To outlive the kindly use and fair esteem 
Of the poor calling which my youth embraced 
With no unworthy prospect. But enough ; 

— Thoughts crowd upon me — and 'twere seemlier 
now 
To stop, and yield our gracious Teacher thanks 
For the pathetic records which his voice 
Hath here delivered ; words of heartfelt truth, 
Tending to patience when affliction strikes ; 
To hope and love ; to confident repose 
In God ; and reverence for the dust of Man." 

BOOK EIGHTH. 

THE PARSONAGE. 

ARGUMENT. 
Pastor's apology and apprehensions that he might have 
detained his Auditors too long, with the Pastor's invita- 
tion to his house — Solitary disinclined to comply — rallies 
the Wanderer — and playfully draws a comparison be- 
tween his itinerant profession and that of the Knight- 
errant — which leads to Wanderer's giving an account of 
changes in the Country from the manufacturing spirit 
— Favourable effects — The other side of the picture, and 
chiefly as it has affected the humbler classes — Wanderer 
asserts the hollowness of all national grandeur if un- 
supported by moral worth — Physical science unable to 
support itself — Lamentations over an excess of manu- 
facturing industry among the humbler Classes of Society. 
— Picture of a Child employed in a Cotton-mill — 
Ignorance and degradation of Children among the agri- 
cultural Population reviewed — Conversation broken off 
by a renewed Invitation from the Pastor — Path leading 
to his House — Its appearance described — His Daughter 
— His Wife — His Son (a Boy) enters with his Companion 
— Their happy appearance — The Wanderer how affected 
by the sight of them. 
The pensive Sceptic of the lonely vale 
To those acknowledgments subscribed his own, 
With a sedate compliance, which the Priest 
Failed not to notice, inly pleased, and said : — ■ 
" If ye, by whom invited I began 
These narratives of calm and humble life, 
Be satisfied, 'tis well, — the end is gained ; 
And, in return for sympathy bestowed 
And patient listening, thanks accept from me. 
— Life, death, eternity ! momentous themes 
Are they — and might demand a seraph's tongue, 
Were they not equal to their own support ; 
And therefore no incompetence of mine 
Could do them wrong. The universal forms 
Of human nature, in a spot like this, 
Present themselves at once to all men's view : 
Ye wished for act and circumstance, that make 

The individual known and understood ; 
And such as my best judgment could select 
From what the place afforded, have been given ; 
Though apprehensions crossed me that my zeal 
To his might well be likened, who unlocks 
A cabinet stored with gems and pictures — draws 
His treasures forth, soliciting regard 
To this, and this, as worthier than the last, 
Till the spectator, who awhile was pleased 
More than the exhibitor himself, becomes 
Weary and faint, and longs to be released. 
— But let us hence ! my dwelling is in sight, 
And there — " 
At this the Solitary shrunk 
With backward will ; but, wanting not address 
That inward motion to disguise, he said 
To his Compatriot, smiling as he spake ; 
— " The peaceable remains of this good Knight 
Would be disturbed, I fear, with wrathful scorn, 
If consciousness could reach him where he lies 
That one, albeit of these degenerate times, 
Deploring changes past, or dreading change 
Foreseen, had dared to couple, even in thought, 
The fine vocation of the sword and lance 
With the gross aims and body-bending toil 
Of a poor brotherhood who walk the earth 
Pitied, and, where they are not known, despised. 
Yet, by the good Knight's leave, the two estates 
Are graced with some resemblance. Errant those, 
Exiles and wanderers — and the like are these ; 
Who, with their burthen, traverse hill and dale, 
Carrying relief for nature's simple wants. 
— What though no higher recompense be sought 
Than honest maintenance, by irksome toil 
Full oft procured, yet may they claim respect, 
Among the intelligent, for what this course 
Enables them to be and to perform. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Their tardy steps give leisure to observe, 
While solitude permits the mind to feel ; 
Instructs, and prompts her to supply defects 
By the division of her inward self 
For grateful converse : and to these poor men 
Nature (I but repeat your favourite boast) 
Is bountiful — go wheresoe'er they may ; 
Kind nature's various wealth is all their own. 
Versed in the characters of men ; and bound, 
By ties of daily interest, to maintain 
Conciliatory manners and smooth speech ; 
Such have been, and still are in their degree, 
Examples efficacious to refine 
Rude intercourse ; apt agents to expel, 
By importation of unlooked-for arts, 
Barbarian torpor, and blind prejudice ; 
Raising, through just gradation, savage life 
To rustic, and the rustic to urbane. 
— Within their moving magazines is lodged 
Power that comes forth to quicken and exalt 
Affections seated in the mother's breast, 
And in the lover's fancy ; and to feed 
The sober sympathies of long-tried friends. 
— By these Itinerants, as experienced men, 
Counsel is given ; contention they appease 
With gentle language ; in remotest wilds, 
Tears wipe away, and pleasant tidings bring ; 
Could the proud quest of chivalry do more \ " 
" Happy," rej oined the Wanderer, " they who gain 
A panegyric from your generous tongue ! 
But, if to these Wayfarers once pertained 
Aught of romantic interest, it is gone. 
Their purer service, in this realm at least, 
Is past for ever. — An inventive Age 
Has wrought, if not with speed of magic, yet 
To most strange issues. I have lived to mark 
A new and unforeseen creation rise 
From out the labours of a peaceful Land 
Wielding her potent enginery to frame 
And to produce, with appetite as keen 
As that of war, which rests not night or day, 
Industrious to destroy ! With fruitless pains 
Might one like me now visit many a tract 
Which, in his youth, he trod, and trod again, 
A lone pedestrian with a scanty freight, 
Wished-for, or welcome, wheresoe'er he came — 
Among the tenantry of thorpe and vill ; 
Or straggling burgh, of ancient charter proud, 
And dignified by battlements and towers 
Of some stern castle, mouldering on the brow 
Of a green hill or bank of rugged stream. 
The foot-path faintly marked, the horse-track wild, 
And formidable length of plashy lane, 

(Prized avenues ere others had been shaped 
Or easier links connecting place with place) 
Have vanished — swallowed up by stately roads 
Easy and bold, that penetrate the gloom 
Of Britain's farthest glens. The Earth has lent 
Her waters, Air her breezes ; and the sail 
Of traffic glides with ceaseless intercourse, 
Glistening along the low and woody dale ; 
Or, in its progress, on the lofty side, 
Of some bare hill, with wonder kenned from far. 
Meanwhile, at social Industry's command, 
How quick, how vast an increase ! From the germ 
Of some poor hamlet, rapidly produced 
Here a huge town, continuous and compact, 
Hiding the face of earth for leagues — and there, 
Where not a habitation stood before, 
Abodes of men irregularly massed 
Like trees in forests, — spread thrcugh spacious 
tracts, 
O'er which the smoke of unremitting fires 
Hangs permanent, and plentiful as wreaths 
Of vapour glittering in the morning sun. 
And, wheresoe'er the traveller turns liis steps, 
He sees the barren wilderness erased, 
Or disappearing; triumph that proclaims 
How much the mild Directress of the plough 
Owes to alliance with these new-bom arts ! 
— Hence is the wide sea peopled, — hence the shores 
Of Britain are resorted to by ships 
Freighted from every climate of the world 
With the world's choicest produce. Hence that 
sum 
Of keels that rest within her crowded ports, 
Or ride at anchor in her sounds and bays ; 
That animating spectacle of sails 
That, through her inland regions, to and fro 
Pass with the respirations of the tide, 
Perpetual, multitudinous ! Finally, 
Hence a dread arm of floating power, a voice 
Of thunder daunting those who would approach 
With hostile purposes the blessed Isle, 
Truth's consecrated residence, the seat 
Impregnable of Liberty and Peace. 
And yet, happy Pastor of a flock 
Faithfully watched, and, by that loving care 
And Heaven's good providence, preserved from 
taint ! 
With you I grieve, when on the darker side 
Of this great change I look ; and there behold 
Such outrage done to nature as compels 
The indignant power to justify herself ; 
Yea, to avenge her violated rights, 

THE PARSONAGE. 

 

For England's bane. — When soothing darkness 
spreads 
O'er hill and vale," the Wanderer thus expressed 
His recollections, " and the punctual stars, 
While all things else are gathering to their homes, 
Advance, and in the firmament of heaven 
Glitter — but undisturbing, undisturbed ; 
As if their silent company were charged 
With peaceful admonitions for the heart 
Of all-beholding Man, earth's thoughtful lord ; 
Then, in full many a region, once like this 
The assured domain of calm simplicity 
And pensive quiet, an unnatural light 
Prepared for never-resting Labour's eyes 
Breaks from a many-windowed fabric huge ; 
And at the appointed hour a bell is heard, 
Of harsher import than the curfew-knoll 
That spake the Norman Conqueror's stern behest — 
A local summons to unceasing toil ! 
Disgorged are now the ministers of day ; 
And, as they issue from the illumined pile, 
A fresh band meets them, at the crowded door — 
And in the courts — and where the rumbling stream, 
That turns the multitude of dizzy wheels, 
Glares, like a troubled spirit, in its bed 
Among the rocks below. Men, maidens, youths, 
Mother and little children, boys and girls, 
Enter, and each the wonted task resumes 
Within this temple, where is offered up 
To Gain, the master idol of the realm, 
Perpetual sacrifice. Even thus of old 
Our ancestors, within the still domain 
Of vast cathedral or conventual church, 
Their vigils kept ; where tapers day and night 
On the dim altar burned continually, 
In token that the House was evermore 
Watching to God. Religious men were they ; 
Nor would their reason, tutored to aspire 
Above this transitory world, allow- 
That there should pass a moment of the year, 
When in their land the Almighty's service ceased. 
Triumph who will in these profaner rites 
Which we, a generation self-extolled, 
As zealously perform ! I cannot share 
His proud complacency : — yet do I exult, 
Casting reserve away, exult to see 
An intellectual mastery exercised 
O'er the blind elements ; a purpose given, 
A perseverance fed ; almost a soul 
Imparted — to brute matter. I rejoice, 
Measuring the force of those gigantic powers 
That, by the thinking mind, have been compelled 
To serve the will of feeble-bodied Man. 

For with the sense of admiration blends 
The animating hope that time may come 
When, strengthened, yet not dazzled, by the might 
Of this dominion over nature gained, 
Men of all lands shall exercise the same 
In due proportion to their country's need ; 
Learning, though late, that all true glory rests, 
All praise, all safety, and all happiness, 
Upon the moral law. Egyptian Thebes, 
Tyre, by the margin of the sounding waves, 
Palmyra, central in the desert, fell ; 
And the Arts died by which they had been raised. 
— Call Archimedes from his buried tomb 
Upon the grave of vanished Syracuse, 
And feelingly the Sage shall make report 
How insecure, how baseless in itself, 
Is the Philosophy whose sway depends 
On mere material instruments ;— how weak 
Those arts, and high inventions, if unpropped 
By virtue. — He, sighing with pensive grief, 
Amid his calm abstractions, would admit 
That not the slender privilege is theirs 
To save themselves from blank forgetfumess ! " 
When from the Wanderer's lips these words had 
fallen, 
I said, " And, did in truth those vaunted Arts 
Possess such privilege, how could we escape 
Sadness and keen regret, we who revere, 
And would preserve as things above all price, 
The old domestic morals of the land, 
Her simple manners, and the stable worth 
That dignified and cheered a low estate ? 
Oh ! where is now the character of peace, 
Sobriety, and order, and chaste love, 
And honest dealing, and untainted speech, 
And pure good- will, and hospitable cheer ; 
That made the very thought of country-life 
A thought of refuge, for a mind detained 
Reluctantly amid the bustling crowd ? 
Where now the beauty of the sabbath kept 
With conscientious reverence, as a day 
By the almighty Lawgiver pronounced 
Holy and blest ? and where the winning grace 
Of all the lighter ornaments attached 
To time and season, as the year rolled round?" 
" Fled! " was the Wanderer's passionate response, 
" Fled utterly ! or only to be traced 
In a few fortunate retreats like this ; 
Which I behold with trembling, when  think 
What lamentable change, a year — a month — 
May bring ; that brook converting as it runs 
Into an instrument of deadly bane 


 

THE EXCURSION. 

For those, who, yet untempted to forsake 
The simple occupations of their sires, 
Drink the pure water of its innocent stream 
With lip almost as pure. — Domestic bliss 
(Or call it comfort, by a humbler name,) 
How art thou blighted for the poor Man's heart ! 
Lo ! in such neighbourhood, from morn to eve, 
The habitations empty ! or perchance 
The Mother left alone, — no helping hand 
To rock the cradle of her peevish babe ; 
No daughters round her, busy at the wheel, 
Or in dispatch of each day's little growth 
Of household occupation ; no nice arts 
Of needle- work ; no bustle at the fire, 
Where once the dinner was prepared with pride ; 
Nothing to speed the day, or cheer the mind ; 
Nothing to praise, to teach, or to command ! 
The Father, if perchance he still retain 
His old employments, goes to field or wood, 
No longer led or followed by the Sons ; 
Idlers perchance they were, — but in his sight ; 
Breathing fresh air, and treading the green earth ; 
'Till their short holiday of childhood ceased, 
Ne'er to return ! That birthright now is lost. 
Economists will tell you that the State 
Thrives by the forfeiture — unfeeling thought, 
And false as monstrous ! Can the mother thrive 
By the destruction of her innocent sons 
In whom a premature necessity 
Blocks out the forms of nature, preconsumes 
The reason, famishes the heart, shuts up 
The infant Being in itself, and makes 
Its very spring a season of decay ! 
The lot is wretched, the condition sad, 
Whether a pining discontent survive, 
And thirst for change ; or habit hath subdued 
The soul deprest, dejected — even to love 
Of her close tasks, and long captivity. 
Oh, banish far such wisdom as condemns 
A native Briton to these inward chains, 
Fixed in his soul, so early and so deep ; 
Without his own consent, or knowledge, fixed ! 
He is a slave to whom release comes not, 
And cannot come. The boy, where'er he turns, 
Is still a prisoner ; when the wind is up 
Among the clouds, and roars through the ancient 
woods ; 
Or when the sun is shining in the east, 
Quiet and calm. Behold him — in the school 
Of his attainments ? no ; but with the air 
Fanning his temples under heaven's blue arch. 
His raiment, whitened o'er with cotton-flakes 

Or locks of wool, announces whence he comes. 
Creeping his gait and cowering, his lip pale, 
His respiration quick and audible ; 
And scarcely could you fancy that a gleam 
Could break from out those languid eyes, or a blush 
Mantle upon his cheek. Is this the form, 
Is that the countenance, and such the port, 
Of no mean Being  One who should be clothed 
With dignity befitting his proud hope ; 
Who, in his very childhood, should appear 
Sublime from present purity and joy ! 
The limbs increase ; but liberty of mind 
Is gone for ever ; and this organic frame, 
So joyful in its motions, is become 
Dull, to the joy of her own motions dead ; 
And even the touch, so exquisitely poured 
Through the whole body, with a languid will 
Performs its functions ; rarely competent 
To impress a vivid feeling on the mind 
Of what there is delightful in the breeze, 
The gentle visitations of the sun, 
Or lapse of liquid element — by hand, 
Or foot, or lip, in summer's warmth— perceived. 
— Can hope look forward to a manhood raised 
On such foundations?" 
" Hope is none for himl" 
The pale Recluse indignantly exclaimed, 
" And tens of thousands suffer wrong as deep. 
Yet be it asked, in justice to our age, 
If there were not, before those arts appeared, 
These structures rose, commingling old and young, 
And unripe sex with sex, for mutual taint ; 
If there were not, then, in our far-famed Isle, 
Multitudes, who from infancy had breathed 
Air unimprisoned, and had lived at large ; 
Yet walked beneath the sun, in human shape, 
As abject, as degraded ? At this day, 
Who shall enumerate the crazy huts 
And tottering hovels, whence do issue forth 
A ragged Offspring, with their upright hair 
Crowned like the image of fantastic Fear ; 
Or wearing, (shall we say ?) in that white growth 
An ill-adjusted turban, for defence 
Or fierceness, wreathed around their sun-burnt 
brows, 
By savage Nature I Shrivelled are their lips ; 
Naked, and coloured like the soil, the feet 
On which they stand ; as if thereby they drew 
Some nourishment, as trees do by their roots, 
From earth, the common mother of us all. 
Figure and mien, complexion and attire, 
Are leagued to strike dismay; but outstretched 
hand 
And whining voice denote them supplicants 

THE PARSONAGE. 

 

For the least boon that pity can bestow. 
Such on the breast of darksome heaths are found ; 
And with their parents occupy the skirts 
Of furze-clad commons ; such are born and reared 
At the mine's mouth under impending rocks ; 
Or dwell in chambers of some natural cave ; 
Or where their ancestors erected huts, 
For the convenience of unlawful gain, 
In forest purlieus ; and the like are bred, 
All England through, where nooks and slips of 
ground 
Purloined, in times less jealous than our own, 
From the green margin of the public way, 
A residence afford them, 'mid the bloom 
And gaiety of cultivated fields. 
Such (we will hope the lowest in the scale) 
Do I remember oft-times to have seen 
'Mid Buxton's dreary heights. In earnest watch, 
Till the swift vehicle approach, they stand ; 
Then, following closely with the cloud of dust, 
An uncouth feat exhibit, and are gone 
Heels over head, like tumblers on a stage. 
— Up from the ground they snatch the copper coin, 
And, on the freight of merry passengers 
Fixing a steady eye, maintain their speed ; 
And spin — and pant — and overhead again, 
Wild pursuivants ! until their breath is lost, 
Or bounty tires — and every face, that smiled 
Encouragement, hath ceased to look that way. 
— But, like the vagrants of the gipsy tribe, 
These, bred to little pleasure in themselves, 
Are profitless to others. 
Turn we then 
To Britons born and bred within the pale 
Of civil polity, and early trained 
To earn, by wholesome labour in the field, 
The bread they eat. A. sample should I give 
Of what this stock hath long produced to enrich 
The tender age of life, ye would exclaim, 
' Is this the whistling plough-boy whose shrill notes 
Impart new gladness to the morning air ! ' 
Forgive me if I venture to suspect 
That many, sweet to hear of in soft verse, 
Are of no finer frame. Stiff are his joints ; 
Beneath a cumbrous frock, that to the knees 
Invests the thriving churl, his legs appear, 
Fellows to those that lustily upheld 
The wooden stools for everlasting use, 
Whereon our fathers sate. And mark his brow ! 
Under whose shaggy canopy are set 
Two eyes — not dim, but of a healthy stare — 
Wide, sluggish, blank, and ignorant, and strange — 
Proclaiming boldly that they never drew 
A look or motion of intelligence 

From infant-conning of the Christ-cross-row, 
Or puzzling through a primer, line by line, 
Till perfect mastery crown the pains at last. 
— What kindly warmth from touch of fostering 
hand, 
What penetrating power of sun or breeze, 
Shall e'er dissolve the crust wherein his soul 
Sleeps, like a caterpillar sheathed in ice ? 
This torpor is no pitiable work 
Of modern ingenuity ; no town 
Nor crowded city can be taxed with aught 
Of sottish vice or desperate breach of law, 
To which (and who can tell where or how soon ?) 
He may be roused. This Boy the fields produce : 
His spade and hoe, mattock and glittering scythe, 
The carter's whip that on his shoulder rests 
In air high-towering with a boorish pomp, 
The sceptre of his sway ; his country's name, 
Her equal rights, her churches and her schools — 
What have they done for him ? And, let me ask, 
For tens of thousands uninformed as he ? 
In brief, what liberty of mind is here ? " 
This ardent sally pleased the mild good Man, 
To whom the appeal couched in its closing words 
Was pointedly addressed ; and to the thoughts 
That, in assent or opposition, rose 
Within his mind, he seemed prepared to give 
Prompt utterance ; but the Vicar interposed 
With invitation urgently renewed. 
— We followed, taking as he led, a path 
Along a hedge of hollies dark and tall, 
Whose flexile boughs low bending with a weight 
Of leafy spray, concealed the stems and roots 
That gave them nourishment. When frosty winds 
Howl from the north, what kindly warmth, me- 
thought, 
Is here — how grateful this impervious screen !' 
— Not shaped by simple wearing of the foot 
On rural business passing to and fro 
Was the commodious walk : a careful hand 
Had marked the line, and strewn its surface o'er 
With pure cerulean gravel, from the heights 
Fetched by a neighbouring brook. — Across the vale 
The stately fence accompanied our steps ; 
And thus the pathway, by perennial green 
Guarded and graced, seemed fashioned to unite, 
As by a beautiful yet solemn chain, 
The Pastor's mansion with the house of prayer. 
Like image of solemnity, conjoined 
With feminine allurement soft and fair, 
The mansion's self displayed ;— a reverend pile 
With bold projections and recesses deep ; 

 


THE EXCURSION. 

Shadowy, yet gay and lightsome as it stood 
Fronting the noontide sun. We paused to admire 
The pillared porch, elaborately embossed ; 
The low wide windows with their mullions old ; 
The cornice, richly fretted, of grey stone; 
And that smooth slope from which the dwelling rose, 
By beds and banks Arcadian of gay flowers 
And flowering shrubs, protected and adorned : 
Profusion bright ! and every flower ass umin g 
A more than natural vividness of hue, 
From unaffected contrast with the gloom 
Of sober cypress, and the darker foil 
Of yew, in which survived some traces, here 
Not unbecoming, of grotesque device 
And uncouth fancy. From behind the roof 
Rose the slim ash and massy sycamore, 
Blending their diverse foliage with the green 
Of ivy, flourishing and thick, that clasped 
The huge round chimneys, harbour of delight 
For wren and redbreast, — where they sit and sing 
Their slender ditties when the trees are bare. 
Nor must I leave untouched (the picture else 
Were incomplete) a relique of old times 
Happily spared, a little Gothic niche 
Of nicest workmanship ; that once had held 
The sculptured image of some patron-saint, 
Or of the blessed Virgin, looking down 
On all who entered those religious doors. 
But lo ! where from the rocky garden-mount 
Crowned by its antique summer-house — descends, 
Light as the silver fawn, a radiant Girl ; 
For she hath recognised her honoured friend, 
The Wanderer ever welcome ! A prompt kiss 
The gladsome Child bestows at his request ; 
And, up the flowery lawn as we advance, 
Hangs on the old Man with a happy look, 
And with a pretty restless hand of love. 
— We enter — by the Lady of the place 
Cordially greeted. Graceful was her port : 
A lofty stature undepressed by time, 
Whose visitation had not wholly spared 
The finer lineaments of form and face ; 
To that complexion brought which prudence trusts in 
And wisdom loves. — But when a stately ship 
Sails in smooth weather by the placid coast 
On homeward voyage, what — if wind and wave, 
And hardship undergone in various climes, 
Have caused her to abate the virgin pride, 
And that full trim of inexperienced hope 
With which she left her haven — not for this, 
Should the sun strike her, and the impartial breeze 
Play on her streamers, fails she to assume 
Brightness and touching beauty of her own, 



That charm all eyes. So bright, so fair, appeared 
This goodly Matron, shining in the beams 
Of unexpected pleasure. — Soon the board 
Was spread, and we partook a plain repast. 
Here, resting in cool shelter, we beguiled 
The mid-day hours with desultory talk ; 
From trivial themes to general argument 
Passing, as accident or fancy led, 
Or courtesy prescribed. While question rose 
And answer flowed, the fetters of reserve 
Dropping from every mind, the Solitary 
Resumed the manners of his happier days ; 
And in the various conversation bore 
A willing, nay, at times, a forward part ; 
Yet with the grace of one who in the world 
Had learned the art of pleasing, and had now 
Occasion given him to display his skill, 
Upon the stedfast 'vantage-ground of truth. 
He gazed, with admiration unsuppressed, 
Upon the landscape of the sun-bright vale, 
Seen, from the shady room in which we sate, 
In softened perspective ; and more than once 
Praised the consummate harmony serene 
Of gravity and elegance, diffused 
Around the mansion and its whole domain ; 
Not, doubtless, without help of female taste 
And female care. — " A blessed lot is yours ! " 
The words escaped his lip, with a tender sigh 
Breathed over them : but suddenly the door 
Flew open, and a pair of lusty Boys 
Appeared, confusion checking their delight. 
— Not brothers they in feature or attire, 
But fond companions, so I guessed, in field, 
And by the river's margin — whence they come, 
Keen anglers with unusual spoil elated. 
One bears a willow-pannier on his back, 
The boy of plainer garb, whose blush survives 
More deeply tinged. Twin might the other be 
To that fair girl who from the garden-mount 
Bounded : — triumphant entry this for him ! 
Between his hands he holds a smooth blue stone, 
On whose capacious surface see outspread 
Large store of gleaming crimson-spotted trouts ; 
Ranged side by side, and lessening by degrees 
Up to the dwarf that tops the pinnacle. 
Upon the board he lays the sky-blue stone 
With its rich freight ; then' number he proclaims ; 
Tells from what pool the noblest had been dragged ; 
And where the very monarch of the brook, 
After long struggle, had escaped at last — 
Stealing alternately at them and us 
(As doth his comrade too) a look of pride : 
And, verily, the silent creatures made 

DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, &c. 

 

A splendid sight, together thus exposed ; 
Dead — but not sullied or deformed by death, 
That seemed to pity what he could not spare. 
But , the animation in the mien 
Of those two hoys ! yea in the very words 
With which the young narrator was inspired, 
When, as our questions led, he told at large 
Of that day's prowess ! Him might I compare, 
His looks, tones, gestures, eager eloquence, 
To a bold brook that splits for better speed, 
And at the self-same moment, works its way 
Through many channels, ever and anon 
Parted and re-united : his compeer 
To the still lake, whose stillness is to sight 
As beautiful — as grateful to the mind. 
— But to what object shall the lovely Girl 
Be likened? She whose countenance and air 

Unite the graceful qualities of both, 
Even as she shares the pride and joy of both. 
My grey-haired Friend was moved ; his vivid eye 
Glistened with tenderness ; his mind, I knew, 
Was full ; and had, I doubted not, returned, 
Upon this impulse, to the theme — erewhile 
Abruptly broken off. The ruddy boys 
Withdrew, on summons to their well-earned meal ; 
And He — to whom all tongues resigned their rights 
With willingness, to whom the general ear 
Listened with readier patience than to strain 
Of music, lute or harp, a long delight 
That ceased not when his voice had ceased — as One 
Who from truth's central point serenely views 
The compass of his argument — began 
Mildly, and with a clear and steady tone. 

BOOK NINTH. 

DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, AND 
AN EVENING VISIT TO THE LAKE. 

ARGUMENT. 
Wanderer asserts that an active principle pervades the 
Universe, its nohlest seat the human soul— How lively 
this principle is in Childhood— Hence the delight in old 
Age of looking hack upon Childhood— The dignity, 
powers, and privileges of Age asserted — These not to he 
looked for generally but under a just government— Right 
of a human Creature to be exempt from being considered 
as a mere Instrument— The condition of multitudes 
deplored— Former conversation recurred to, and the 
Wanderer's opinions set in a clearer light— Truth placed 
within reach of the humblest— Equality— Happy state 
of the two Boys again adverted to— Earnest wish 
expressed for a System of National Education established 
universally by Government— Glorious effects of this 
foretold— Walk to the Lake— Grand spectacle from the 
side of a hill— Address of Priest to the Supreme Being 
—in the course of which he contrasts with ancient Bar- 
barism the present appearance of the scene before him 
—The change ascribed to Christianity— Apostrophe to 
his flock, living and dead— Gratitude to the Almighty 
—Return over the Lake— Parting with the Solitary— 
Under what circumstances. 
"To every Form of being is assigned," 
Thus calmly spake the venerable Sage, 
"An active Principle : — howe'er removed 
From sense and observation, it subsists 
In all things, in all natures ; in the stars 

Of azure heaven, the unenduring clouds, 
In flower and tree, in every pebbly stone 
That paves the brooks, the stationary rocks, 
The moving waters, and the invisible air. 
Whate'er exists hath properties that spread 
Beyond itself, communicating good, 
A simple blessing, or with evil mixed ; 
Spirit that knows no insulated spot, 
No chasm, no solitude ; from link to link 
It circulates, the Soul of all the worlds. 
This is the freedom of the universe ; 
Unfolded still the more, more visible, 
The more we know ; and yet is reverenced least, 
And least respected in the human Mind, 
Its most apparent home. The food of hope 
Is meditated action ; robbed of this 
Her sole support, she languishes and dies. 
We perish also ; for we live by hope 
And by desire ; we see by the glad light 
And breathe the sweet air of futurity; 
And so we live, or else we have no life. 
To-morrow — nay perchance this very hour 
(_For every moment hath its own to-morrow !) 
Those blooming Boys, whose hearts are almost sick 
With present triumph, will be sure to find 
A field before them freshened with the dew 
Of other expectations ;— in which course 
Their happy year spins round. The youth obeys 

 

THE EXCURSION. 


A like glad impulse ; and so moves the man 
'Mid all his apprehensions, cares, and fears, — 
Or so he ought to move. Ah ! why in age 
Do we revert so fondly to the walks 
Of childhood — but that there the Soul discerns 
The dear memorial footsteps unimpaired 
Of her own native vigour ; thence can hear 
Reverberations ; and a choral song, 
Commingling with the incense that ascends, 
Undaunted, toward the imperishable heavens, 
From her own lonely altar ? 
Do not think 
That good and wise ever will be allowed, 
Though strength decay, to breathe in such estate 
As shall divide them wholly from the stir 
Of hopeful nature. Rightly is it said 
That Man descends into the Vale of years ; 
Yet have I thought that we might also speak, 
And not presumptuously, I trust, of Age, 
As of a final Eminence; though bare 
In aspect and forbidding, yet a point 
On which 'tis not impossible to sit 
In awful sovereignty ; a place of power, 
A throne, that may be likened unto his, 
Who, in some placid day of summer, looks 
Down from a mountain-top, — say one of those 
High peaks, that bound the vale where now we 
are. 
Faint, and diminished to the gazing eye, 
Forest and field, and hill and dale appear, 
With all the shapes over their surface spread : 
But, while the gross and visible frame of things 
Relinquishes its hold upon the sense, 
Yea almost on the Mind herself, and seems 
All unsubstantialized, — how loud the voice 
Of waters, with invigorated peal 
From the full river in the vale below, 
Ascending ! For on that superior height 
Who sits, is disencumbered from the press 
Of near obstructions, and is privileged 
To breathe in solitude, above the host 
Of ever-humming insects, 'mid thin air 
That suits not them. The murmur of the leaves 
Many and idle, visits not his ear : 
This he is freed from, and from thousand notes 
(Not less unceasing, not less vain than these,) 
By which the finer passages of sense 
Are occupied ; and the Soul, that would incline 
To listen, is prevented or deterred. 
And may it not be hoped, that, placed by age 
In like removal, tranquil though severe, 
We are not so removed for utter loss ; 
But for some favour, suited to our need ? 

What more than that the severing should confer 
Fresh power to commune with the invisible world, 
And hear the mighty stream of tendency 
Uttering, for elevation of our thought, 
A clear sonorous voice, inaudible 
To the vast multitude ; whose doom it is 
To run the giddy round of vain delight, 
Or fret and labour on the Plain below. 
But, if to such sublime ascent the hopes 
Of Man may rise, as to a welcome close 
And termination of his mortal course ; 
Them only can such hope inspire whose minds 
Have not been starved by absolute neglect ; 
Nor bodies crushed by unremitting toil ; 
To whom kind Nature, therefore, may afford 
Proof of the sacred love she bears for all ; 
Whose birthright Reason, therefore, may ensure. 
For me, consulting what I feel within 
In times when most existence with herself 
Is satisfied, I cannot but believe, 
That, far as kindly Nature hath free scope 
And Reason's sway predominates ; even so far, 
Country, society, and time itself, 
That saps the individual's bodily frame, 
And lays the generations low in dust, 
Do, by the almighty Ruler's grace, partake 
Of one maternal spirit, bringing forth 
And cherishing with ever-constant love, 
That tires not, nor betrays. Our life is turned 
Out of her course, wherever man is made 
An offering, or a sacrifice, a tool 
Or implement, a passive thing employed 
As a brute mean, without acknowledgment 
Of common right or interest in the end ; 
Used or abused, as selfishness may prompt. 
Say, what can follow for a rational soul 
Perverted thus, but weakness in all good, 
And strength in evil ? Hence an after-call 
For chastisement, and custody, and bonds, 
And oft-times Death, avenger of the past, 
And the sole guardian in whose hands we dare 
Entrust the future. — Not for these sad issues 
Was Man created ; but to obey the law 
Of life, and hope, and action. And 'tis known 
That when we stand upon our native soil, 
Unelbowed by such objects as oppress 
Our active powers, thosepowers themselves become 
Strong to subvert our noxious qualities : 
They sweep distemper from the busy day, 
And make the chalice of the big round year 
Run o'er with gladness ; whence the Being moves 
In beauty through the world ; and all who see 
Bless him, rejoicing in his neighbourhood." 

DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, &c. 

 

« Then," said the Solitary, "by what force 
I Of language shall a feeling heart express 
Her sorrow for that multitude in whom 
We look for health from seeds that have been sown 
In sickness, and for increase in a power 
That works but by extinction ? On themselves 
They cannot lean, nor turn to their own hearts 
To know what they must do ; their wisdom is 
To look into the eyes of others, thence 
To be instructed what they must avoid : 
Or rather, let us say, how least observed, 
How with most quiet and most silent death, 
With the least taint and injury to the air 
The oppressor breathes, their human form divine, 
And their immortal soul, may waste away." 
The Sage rejoined, " I thank you — you have 
spared 
My voice the utterance of a keen regret, 
A wide compassion which with you I share. 
When, heretofore, I placed before your sight 
A Little-one, subjected to the arts 
Of modern ingenuity, and made 
The senseless member of a vast machine, 
Serving as doth a ypindle or a wheel ; 
i Think not, that, pitying him, I could forget 
J' The rustic Boy, who walks the fields, untaught ; 
i The slave of ignorance, and oft of want, 
I And miserable hunger. Much, too much, 
, Of this unhappy lot, in early youth 
 We both have witnessed, lot which I myself 
Shared, though in mild and merciful degree : 
j Yet was the mind to hinderances exposed, 
I Through which I struggled, not without distress 
; And sometimes injury, like a lamb enthralled 
'Mid thorns and brambles ; or a bird that breaks 
' Through a strong net, and mounts upon the wind, 
! Though with her plumes impaired. If they, whose 
souls 
I Should open while they range the richer fields 
: Of merry England, are obstructed less 
; By indigence, their ignorance is not less, 
, Nor less to be deplored. For who can doubt 
' That tens of thousands at this day exist 
, Such as the boy you painted, lineal heirs 
■ Of those who once were vassals of her soil, 
] Following its fortunes like the beasts or trees 
I Which it sustained. But no one takes delight 
j In this oppression ; none are proud of it ; 
J It bears no sounding name, nor ever bore ; 
i A standing grievance, an indigenous vice 
j  Of every country under heaven. My thoughts 
•' Were turned to evils that are new and chosen, 

A bondage lurking under shape of good,- 

Arts, in themselves beneficent and kind, 
But all too fondly followed and too far ; — 
To victims, which the merciful can see 
Nor think that they are victims — turned to wrongs, 
By women, who have children of their own, 
Beheld without compassion, yea with praise ! 
I spake of mischief by the wise diffused 
With gladness, thinking that the more it spreads 
The healthier, the securer, we become ; 
Delusion which a moment may destroy ! 
Lastly, I mourned for those whom I had seen 
Corrupted and cast down, on favoured ground, 
Where circumstance and nature had combined 
To shelter innocence, and cherish love ; 
Who, but for this intrusion, would have lived, 
Possessed of health, and strength, and peace of mind ; 
Thus would have lived, or never have been born. 
Alas ! what differs more than man from man ! 
And whence that difference ? whence but from him- 
self? 
For see the universal Race endowed 
With the same upright form ! — The sun is fixed, 
And the infinite magnificence of heaven 
Fixed, within reach of every human eye ; 
The sleepless ocean murmurs for all ears ; 
The vernal field infuses fresh delight 
Into all hearts. Throughout the world of sense, 
Even as an object is sublime or fair, 
That object is laid open to the view 
Without reserve or veil ; and as a power 
Is salutary, or an influence sweet, 
Are each and all enabled to perceive 
That power, that influence, by impartial law. 
Gifts nobler are vouchsafed alike to all ; 
Reason, and, with that reason, smiles and tears ; 
Imagination, freedom in the will ; 
Conscience to guide and check ; and death to be 
Foretasted, immortality conceived 
By all, — a blissful immortality,' 
To them whose holiness on earth shall make 
The Spirit capable of heaven, assured. 
Strange, then, nor less than monstrous, might be 
deemed 
The failure, if the Almighty, to this point 
Liberal and undistinguishing, should hide 
The excellence of moral qualities 
From common understanding ; leaving truth 
And virtue, difficult, abstruse, and dark ; 
Hard to be won, and only by a few ; 
Strange, should He deal herein with nice respects, 
And frustrate all the rest ! Believe it not : 
The primal duties shine aloft — like stars ; 
The charities that soothe, and heal, and bless, 
a R  

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Are scattered at the feet of Man — like flowers. 
The generous inclination, the just rule, 
Kind wishes, and good actions, and pure thoughts — ■ 
No mystery is here ! Here is no hoon 
For high — yet not for low ; for proudly graced — ■ 
Yet not for meek of heart. The smoke ascends 
To heaven as lightly from the cottage-hearth 
As from the haughtiest palace. He, whose soul 
Ponders this true equality, may walk 
The fields of earth with gratitude and hope ; 
Yet, in that meditation, will he find 
Motive to sadder grief, as we have found ; 
Lamenting ancient virtues overthrown, 
And for the injustice grieving, that hath made 
So wide a difference between man and man. 
Then let us rather fix our gladdened thoughts 
Upon the brighter scene. How blest that pair 
Of blooming Boys (whom we beheld even now) 
Blest in their several and their common lot ! 
A few short hours of each returning day 
The thriving prisoners of their village-school : 
And thence let loose, to seek their pleasant homes 
Or range the grassy lawn in vacancy ; 
To breathe and to be happy, run and shout 
Idle, — but no delay, no harm, no loss ; 
For every genial power of heaven and earth, 
Through all the seasons of the changeful year, 
Obsequiously doth take upon herself 
To labour for them ; bringing each in turn 
The tribute of enjoyment, knowledge, health, 
Beauty, or strength ! Such privilege is theirs, 
Granted alike in the outset of their course 
To both ; and, if that partnership must cease, 
I grieve not," to the Pastor here he turned, 
" Much as I glory in that child of yours, 
Repine not for his cottage-comrade, whom 
Belike no higher destiny awaits 
Than the old hereditary wish fulfilled ; 
The wish for liberty to live — content 
With what Heaven grants, and die — in peace of 
mind, 
Within the bosom of his native vale. 
At least, whatever fate the noon of life 
Reserves for either, sure it is that both 
Have been permitted to enjoy the dawn ; 
Whether regarded as a jocund time, 
That in itself may terminate, or lead 
In course of nature to a sober eve. 
Both have been fairly dealt with ; looking back 
They will allow that justice has in them 
Been shown, alike to body and to mind." 
He paused, as if revolving in his soul 

Some weighty matter ; then, with fervent voice 
And an impassioned majesty, exclaimed — 
" for the coming of that glorious time 
When, prizing knowledge as her noblest wealth 
And best protection, this imperial Realm, 
While she exacts allegiance, shall admit 
An obligation, on her part, to teach 
Them who are born to serve her and obey; 
Binding herself by statute to secure 
For all the children whom her soil maintains 
The rudiments of letters, and inform 
The mind with moral and religious truth, 
Both understood and practised, — so that none, 
However destitute, be left to droop 
By timely culture unsustained ; or run 
Into a wild disorder ; or be forced 
To drudge through a weary life without the help 
Of intellectual implements and tools ; 
A savage horde among the civilised, 
A servile band among the lordly free ! 
This sacred right, the lisping babe proclaims 
To be inherent in him, by Heaven's will, 
For the protection of his innocence ; 
And the rude boy — who, having overpast 
The sinless age, by conscience is enrolled, 
Yet mutinously knits his angry brow, 
And lifts his wilful hand on mischief bent, 
Or turns the godlike faculty of speech 
To impious use— by process indirect 
Declares his due, while he makes known his need. 
— This sacred right is fruitlessly announced, 
This universal plea in vain addressed, 
To eyes and ears of parents who themselves 
Did, in the time of their necessity, 
Urge it in vain ; and, therefore, like a prayer 
That from the humblest floor ascends to heaven, 
It mounts to reach the State's parental ear ; 
Who, if indeed she own a mother's heart, 
And be not most unfeelingly devoid 
Of gratitude to Providence, will grant 
The unquestionable good — which, England, safe 
From interference of external force, 
May grant at leisure ; without risk incurred 
That what in wisdom for herself she doth, 
Others shall e'er be able to undo. 

Look ! and behold, from Calpe's sunburnt cliffs 
To the flat margin of the Baltic sea, 
Long-reverenced titles cast away as weeds ; 
Laws overturned ; and territory split, 
Like fields of ice rent by the polar wind, 
And forced to join in less obnoxious shapes 
Which, ere they gain consistence, by a gust 



DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, &c. 

 

Of the same breath are shattered and destroyed. 
Meantime the sovereignty of these fair Isles 
Remains entire and indivisible : 
And, if that ignorance were removed, which breeds 
Within the compass of their several shores 
Dark discontent, or loud commotion, each 
Might still preserve the beautiful repose 
Of heavenly bodies shining in their spheres. 
— The discipline of slavery is unknown 
Among us, — hence the more do we require 
The discipline of virtue ; order else 
Cannot subsist, nor confidence, nor peace. 
Thus, duties rising out of good possest 
And prudent caution needful to avert 
Impending evil, equally require 
That the whole people should be taught and trained. 
So shall licentiousness and black resolve 
Be rooted out, and virtuous habits take 
Their place ; and genuine piety descend, 
Like an inheritance, from age to age. 
With such foundations laid, avaunt the fear 
Of numbers crowded on their native soil, 
To the prevention of all healthful growth 
Through mutual injury ! Rather in the law 
Of increase and the mandate from above 
Rejoice ! — and ye have special cause for joy. 
— For, as the element of air affords 
An easy passage to the industrious bees 
Fraught with their burthens ; and a way as smooth 
For those ordained to take their sounding flight 
From the thronged hive, and settle where they list 
In fresh abodes — their labour to renew ; 
So the wide waters, open to the power, 
The will, the instincts, and appointed needs 
Of Britain, do invite her to cast off 
Her swarms, and in succession send them forth ; 
Bound to establish new communities 
On every shore whose aspect favours hope 
Or bold adventure ; promising to skill 
And perseverance their deserved reward. 
Yes," he continued, kindling as he spake, 
"Change wide, and deep, and silently performed, 
This Land shall witness; and as days roll on, 
Earth's universal frame shall feel the effect ; 
Even till the smallest habitable rock, 
Beaten by lonely billows, hear the songs 
Of humanised society ; and bloom 
With civil arts, that shall breathe forth their 
fragrance, 
A grateful tribute to all-ruling Heaven. 
From culture, unexclusively bestowed 
On Albion's noble Race in freedom born, 

Expect these mighty issues : from the pains 
And faithful care of unambitious schools 
Instructing simple childhood's ready ear : 
Thence look for these magnificent results ! 
— Vast the circumference of hope — and ye 
Are at its centre, British Lawgivers ; 
Ah! sleep not there in shame! Shall Wisdom's voice 
From out the bosom of these troubled times 
Repeat the dictates of her calmer mind, 
And shall the venerable halls ye fill 
Refuse to echo the sublime decree ? 
Trust not to partial care a general good ; 
Transfer not to futurity a work 
Of urgent need. — Your Country must complete 
Her glorious destiny. Begin even now, 
Now, when oppression, like the Egyptian plague 
Of darkness, stretched o'er guilty Europe, makes 
The brightness more conspicuous that invests 
The happy Island where ye think and act ; 
Now, when destruction is a prime pursuit, 
Show to the wretched nations for what end 
The powers of civil polity were given." 
Abruptly here, but with a graceful air, 
The Sage broke off. No sooner had he ceased 
Than, looking forth, the gentle Lady said, 
" Behold the shades of afternoon have fallen 
Upon this flowery slope ; and see — beyond — 
The silvery lake is streaked with placid blue ; 
As if preparing for the peace of evening. 
How temptingly the landscape shines ! The air 
Breathes invitation ; easy is the walk 
To the lake's margin, where a boat lies moored 
Under a sheltering tree." — Upon this hint 
We rose together : all were pleased ; but most 
The beauteous girl, whose cheek was flushed with j oy. 
Light as a sunbeam glides along the hills 
She vanished — eager to impart the scheme 
To her loved brother and his shy compeer. 
— Now was there bustle in the Yicar's house 
And earnest preparation, — Forth we went, 
And down the vale along the streamlet's edge 
Pursued our way, a broken company, 
Mute or conversing, single or in pairs. 
Thus having reached a bridge, that overarched 
The hasty rivulet where it lay becalmed 
In a deep pool, by happy chance we saw 
A two-fold image ; on a grassy bank 
A snow-white ram, and in the crystal flood 
Another and the same ! Most beautiful, 
On the green turf, with his imperial front 
Shaggy and bold, and wreathed horns superb, 
The breathing creature stood ; as beautiful, 
Beneath him, shewed his shadowy counterpart. 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

Each had his glowing mountains, each his sky, 
And each seemed centre of his own fair world : 
Antipodes unconscious of each other, 
Yet, in partition, with their several spheres, 
Blended in perfect stillness, to our sight ! 
" Ah ! what a pity were it to disperse, 
Or to disturb, so fair a spectacle, 
And yet a breath can do it ! " 
These few words 
The Lady whispered, while we stood and gazed 
Gathered together, all in still delight, 
Not without awe. Thence passing on, she said 
Tn like low voice to my particular ear, 
" I love to hear that eloquent old Man 
Pour forth his meditations, and descant 
On human life from infancy to age. 
How pure his spirit ! in what vivid hues 
His mind gives back the various forms of things, 
Caught in their fairest, happiest, attitude ! 
While he is speaking, I have power to see 
Even as he sees ; but when his voice hath ceased, 
Then, with a sigh, sometimes I feel, as now, 
That combinations so serene and bright 
Cannot be lasting in a world like ours, 
Whose highest beauty, beautiful as it is, 
Like that reflected in yon quiet pool, 
Seems but a fleeting sun-beam's gift, whose peace 
The sufferance only of a breath of air ! " 
More had she said — but sportive shouts were heard 
Sent from the jocund hearts of those two Boys, 
Who, bearing each a basket on his arm, 
Down the green field came tripping after us. 
With caution we embarked ; and now the pair 
For prouder service were addrest ; but each, 
Wishful to leave an opening for my choice, 
Dropped the light oar his eager hand had seized. 
Thanks given for that becoming courtesy, 
Their place I took — and for a grateful office 
Pregnant with recollections of the time 
When, on thy bosom, spacious Windermere ! 
A Youth, I practised this delightful art ; 
Tossed on the waves alone, or 'mid a crew 
Of joyous comrades. Soon as the reedy marge 
Was cleared, I dipped, with arms accordant, oars 
Free from obstruction ; and the boat advanced 
Through crystal water, smoothly as a hawk, 
That, disentangled from the shady boughs 
Of some thick wood, her place of covert, cleaves 
With correspondent wings the abyss of air. 
— " Observe," the Vicar said, "yon rocky isle 
With birch-trees fringed; my hand shall guide 
the helm, 

While thitherward we shape our course ; or while 
We seek that other, on the western shore ; 
Where the bare columns of those lofty firs, 
Supporting gracefully a massy dome 
Of sombre foliage, seem to imitate 
A Grecian temple rising from the Deep." 
" Turn where we may," said I, " we cannot err 
In this delicious region." — Cultured slopes, 
Wild tracts of forest-ground, and scattered groves, 
And mountains bare, or clothed with ancient woods, 
Surrounded us ; and, as we held our way 
Along the level of the glassy flood, 
They ceased not to surround us ; change of place, 
From kindred features diversely combined, 
Producing change of beauty ever new. 
— Ah ! that such beauty, varying in the light 
Of living nature, cannot be portrayed 
By words, nor by the pencil's silent skill ; 
But is the property of him alone 
Who hath beheld it, noted it with care, 
And in his mind recorded it with love ! 
Suffice it, therefore, if the rural Muse 
Vouchsafe sweet influence, while her Poet speaks 
Of trivial occupations well devised, 
And unsought pleasures springing up by chance ; 
As if some friendly Genius had ordained 
That, as the day thus far had been enriched 
By acquisition of sincere delight, 
The same should be continued to its close. 
One spirit animating old and young, 
A gipsy-fire we kindled on the shore 
Of the fair Isle with birch-trees fringed — and there, 
Merrily seated in a ring, partook 
A choice repast — served by our young companions 
With rival earnestness and kindred glee. 
Launched from our hands the smooth stone 
skimmed the lake ; 
With shouts we raised the echoes ; — stiller sounds 
The lovely Girl supplied — a simple song, 
Whose low tones reached not to the distant rocks 
To be repeated thence, but gently sank 
Into our hearts ; and charmed the peaceful flood. 
Rapaciously we gathered flowery spoils 
From land and water ; lilies of each hue — 
Golden and white, that float upon the waves, 
And court the wind ; and leaves of that shy plant, 
(Her flowers were shed) the lily of the vale, 
That loves the ground, and from the sun withholds 
Her pensive beauty ; from the breeze her sweets. 
Such product, and such pastime, did the place 
And season yield ; but, as we re-embarked, 

DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, &c. 

 

Leaving, in quest of other scenes, the shore 
Of that wild spot, the Solitary said 
In a low voice, yet careless who might hear, 
| The fire, that burned so brightly to our wish, 
Where is it now ? — Deserted on the beach — 
Dying, or dead ! Nor shall the fanning breeze 
Revive its ashes. What care we for this, 
Whose ends are gained ? Behold an emblem here 
Of one day's pleasure, and all mortal joys ! 
And, in this unpremeditated slight 
Of that which is no longer needed, see 
The common course of human gratitude !" 
This plaintive note disturbed not the repose 
Of the still evening. Right across the lake 
Our pinnace moves ; then, coasting creek and bay, 
Glades we behold, and into thickets peep, 
Where couch the spotted deer ; or raised our eyes 
To shaggy steeps on which the careless goat 
Browsed by the side of dashing waterfalls ; 
And thus the bark, meandering with the shore, 
Pursued her voyage, till a natural pier 
Of jutting rock invited us to land. 
Alert to follow as the Pastor led, 
We clomb a green hill's side ; and, as we clomb, 
The Valley, opening out her bosom, gave 
Fair prospect, intercepted less and less, 
O'er the flat meadows and indented coast 
Of the smooth lake, in compass seen : — far off, 
And yet conspicuous, stood the old Church-tower, 
In majesty presiding over fields 
And habitations seemingly preserved 
From all intrusion of the restless world 
By rocks impassable and mountains huge. 
Soft heath this elevated spot supplied, 
And choice of moss-clad stones, whereon we couched 
Or sate reclined ; admiring quietly 
The general aspect of the scene ; but each 
Not seldom over anxious to make known 
His own discoveries ; or to favourite points 
Directing notice, merely from a wish 
To impart a joy, imperfect while unshared. 
That rapturous moment never shall I forget 
When these particular interests were effaced 
From every mind ! — Already had the sun, 
Sinking with less than ordinary state, 
Attained his western bound ; but rays cf light — 
Now suddenly diverging from the orb 
Retired behind the mountain tops or veiled 
By the dense air — shot upwards to the crown 
Of the blue firmament — aloft, and wide : . 
And multitudes of little floating clouds, 

Through their ethereal texture pierced — ere we, 
Who saw, of change were conscious — had become 
Vivid as fire ; clouds separately poised, — 
Innumerable multitude of forms 
Scattered through half the circle of the sky; 
And giving back, and shedding each on each, 
With prodigal communion, the bright hues 
Which from the unapparent fount of glory 
They had imbibed, and ceased not to receive. 
That which the heavens displayed, the liquid deep 
Repeated ; but with unity sublime ! 
While from the grassy mountain's open side 
We gazed, in silence hushed, with eyes intent 
On the refulgent spectacle, diffused 
Through earth, sky, water, and all visible space, 
The Priest in holy transport thus exclaimed : 
" Eternal Spirit ! universal God ! 
Power inaccessible to human thought, 
Save by degrees and steps which thou hast deigned 
To furnish ; for this effluence of thyself, 
To the infirmity of mortal sense 
Vouchsafed ; this local transitory type 
Of thy paternal splendours, and the pomp 
Of those who fill thy courts in highest heaven, 
The radiant Cherubim ; — accept the thanks 
Which we, thy humble Creatures, here convened, 
Presume to offer ; we, who — from the breast 
Of the frail earth, permitted to behold 
The faint reflections only of thy face — 
Are yet exalted, and in soul adore ! 
Such as they are who in thy presence stand 
Unsullied, incorruptible, and drink 
Imperishable majesty streamed forth 
From thy empyreal throne, the elect of earth 
Shall be — divested at the appointed hour 
Of all dishonour, cleansed from mortal stain. 
— Accomplish, then, their number ; and conclude 
Time's weary course ! Or if, by thy decree, 
The consummation that will come by stealth 
Be yet far distant, let thy Word prevail, 
Oh ! let thy Word prevail, to take away 
The sting of human nature. Spread the law, 
As it is written in thy holy book, 
Throughout all lands : let every nation hear 
The high behest, and every heart obey ; 
Both for the love of purity, and hope 
Which it affords, to such as do thy will 
And persevere in good, that they shall rise, 
To have a nearer view of thee, in heaven. 
— Father of good ! this prayer in bounty grant, 
In mercy grant it, to thy wretched sons. 
Then, nor till then, shall persecution cease, 

 

THE EXCURSION. 

And cruel wars expire. The way is marked, 
The guide appointed, and the ransom paid. 
Alas ! the nations, who of yore received 
These tidings, and in Christian temples meet 
The sacred truth to acknowledge, linger still ; 
Preferring honds and darkness to a state 
Of holy freedom, by redeeming love 
Proffered to all, while yet on earth detained. 
So fare the many ; and the thoughtful few, 
Who in the anguish of their souls bewail 
This dire perverseness, cannot choose but ask, 
Shall it endure?— Shall enmity and strife, 
Falsehood and guile, be left to sow their seed ; 
And the land never perish ? Is the hope 
Fallacious, or shall righteousness obtain 
A peaceable dominion, wide as earth, 
And ne'er to fail ? Shall that blest day arrive 
When they, whose choice or lot it is to dwell 
In crowded cities, without fear shall live 
Studious of mutual benefit ; and he, 
Whom Morn awakens, among dews and flowers 
Of every clime, to till the lonely field, 
Be happy in himself \— The law of faith 
Working through love, such conquest shall it gain, 
Such triumph over sin and guilt achieve \ 
Almighty Lord, thy further grace impart ! 
And with that help the wonder shall be seen 
Fulfilled, the hope accomplished ; and thy praise 
Be sung with transport and unceasing joy. 
Once," and with mild demeanour, as he spake, 
On us the venerable Pastor turned 
His beaming eye that had been raised to Heaven, 
" Once, while the Name, Jehovah, was a sound 
Within the circuit of this sea-girt isle 
Unheard, the savage nations bowed the head 
To Gods delighting in remorseless deeds ; 
Gods which themselves had fashioned, to promote 
 purposes, and flatter foul desires. 
Then, in the bosom of yon mountain-cove, 
To those inventions of corrupted man 
Mysterious rites were solemnised ; and there — 
Amid impending rocks and gloomy woods — 
Of those terrific Idols some received 
Such dismal service, that the loudest voice 
Of the swoln cataracts (which now are heard 
Soft murmuring) was too weak to overcome, 
Though aided by wild winds, the groans and shrieks 
Of human victims, offered up to appease 
Or to propitiate. And, if living eyes 
Had visionary faculties to see 
The thing that hath been as the thing that is, 
Aghast we might behold this crystal Merc 

Bedimmed with smoke, in wreaths voluminous, 
Flung from the body of devouring fires, 
To Taranis erected on the heights 
By priestly hands, for sacrifice performed 
Exultingly, in view of open day 
And full assemblage of a barbarous host; 
Or to Andates, female Power ! who gave 
(For so they fancied) glorious victory. 
— A few rude monuments of mountain-stone 
Survive ; all else is swept away. — How bright 
The appearances of tilings ! From such, how 
changed 
The existing worship ; and with those compared, 
The worshippers how innocent and blest ! 
So wide the difference, a willing mind 
Might almost think, at this affecting hour, 
That paradise, the lost abode of man, 
Was raised again : and to a happy few, 
In its original beauty, here restored. 
Whence but from thee, the true and only God, 
And from the faith derived through Him who bled 
Upon the cross, this marvellous advance 
Of good from evil ; as if one extreme 
Were left, the other gamed. — O ye, who come 
To kneel devoutly in yon reverend Pile, 
Called to such office by the peaceful sound 
Of sabbath bells ; and ye, who sleep in earth, 
All cares forgotten, round its hallowed walls ! 
For you, in presence of this little band 
Gathered together on the green hill-side, 
Your Pastor is emboldened to prefer 
Vocal thanksgivings to the eternal King ; 
Whose love, whose counsel, whose commands, have 
made 
Your very poorest rich in peace of thought 
And in good works ; and him, who is endowed 
With scantiest knowledge, master of all truth 
Which the salvation of his soul requires. 
Conscious of that abundant favour showered 
On you, the children of my humble care, 
And this dear land, our country, while on earth 
We sojourn, have I lifted up my soul, 
Joy giving voice to fervent gratitude. 
These barren rocks, your stern inheritance ; 
These fertile fields, that recompense your pains : 
The shadowy vale, the sunny mountain-top ; 
Woods waving in the wind their lofty heads, 
Or hushed ; the roaring waters, and the still — 
They see the offering of my lifted hands, 
They hear my lips present their sacrifice, 
They know if I be silent, morn or even : 
For, though in whispers speaking, the full heart 
Will find a vent ; and thought is praise to him, 

DISCOURSE OF THE WANDERER, &c. 

 

Audible praise, to thee, omniscient Mind, 
From whom all gifts' descend, all blessings flow ! " 
This vesper-service closed, without delay, 
From that exalted station to the plain 
Descending, we pursued our homeward course, 
In mute composure, o'er the shadowy lake, 
Under a faded sky. No trace remained 
Of those celestial splendours ; grey the vault — 
Pure, cloudless, ether ; and the star of eve 
Was wanting ; but inferior lights appeared 
Faintly, too faint almost for sight ; and some 
Above the darkened hills stood boldly forth 
In twinkling lustre, ere the boat attained 
Her mooring-place ; where, to the sheltering tree, 
Our youthful Voyagers bound fast her prow, 
With prompt yet careful hands. This done, we paced 
The dewy fields ; but ere the Vicar's door 
Was reached, the Solitary checked his steps ; 
Then, intermingling thanks, on each bestowed 
A farewell salutation ; and, the like 
Receiving, took the slender path that leads 
To the one cottage in the lonely dell : 

But turned not without welcome promise made 
That he would share the pleasures and pursuits 
Of yet another summer's day, not loth 
To wander with us through the fertile vales, 
And o'er the mountain-wastes. " Another sun,' 
Said he, " shall shine upon us, ere we part ; 
Another sun, and peradventure more ; 
If time, with free consent, be yours to give, 
And season favours." 
To enfeebled Power, 
From this communion with uninjured Minds, 
What renovation had been brought ; and what 
Degree of healing to a wounded spirit, 
Dejected, and habitually disposed 
To seek, in degradation of the Kind, 
Excuse and solace for her own defects ; 
How far those erring notions were reformed ; 
And whether aught, of tendency as good 
And pure, from further intercourse ensued ; 
This— if delightful hopes, as heretofore, 
Inspire the serious song, and gentle Hearts 
Cherish, and lofty Minds approve the past — 
My future labours may not leave untold. 

NOTES. 

Page . 
'And, hovering, round it often did a raven fly.' 
From a short MS. poem read to me when an under- 
graduate, by my schoolfellow and friend, Charles Farish, 
long since deceased. The verses were by a brother of 
his, a man of promising genius, who died young. 
Page . 
' The Borderers.' 
This Dramatic Piece, as noticed in its title-page, was 
composed in -. It lay nearly from that time till 
within the last two or three months unregarded among 
my papers, without being mentioned even to my most 
intimate friends. Having, however, impressions upon 
my mind which made me unwilling to destroy the MS., 
I determined to undertake the responsibility of publish- 
ing it during my own life, rather than impose upon my 
successors the task of deciding its fate. Accordingly it 
has been revised with some care ; but, as it was at first 
written, and is now published, without any view to its 
exhibition upon the stage, not the slightest alteration 
has been made in the conduct of the story, or the com- 
position of the characters ; above all, in respect to the 
two leading Persons of the Drama, I felt no inducement 
to make any change. The study of human nature sug- 
gests this awful truth, that, as in the trials to which life 
subjects us, sin and crime are apt to start from their 
very opposite qualities, so are there no limits to the 
hardening of the heart, and the perversion of the under- 
standing to which they may carry their slaves. During 
my long residence in France, while the Revolution was 
rapidly advancing to its extreme of wickedness, I had 
frequent opportunities of being an eye-witness of this 
process, and it was while that knowledge was fresh upon 
my memory, that the Tragedy of " The Borderers " was 
composed. 
Page . 
' The Norman boy.' 
' Among ancient Trees there are few, I believe, at least 
in France, so worthy of attention as an Oak which may 
be seen in the ' Pays de Caux,' about a league from 
Tvetot, close to the church, and in the burial-ground of 
Allonville. 
' The height of this Tree does not answer to its girth ; 
the trunk, from the roots to the summit, forms a com- 
plete cone ; and the inside of this cone is hollow through- 
out the whole of its height. 
' Such is the Oak of Allonville, in its state of nature. 
The hand of Man, however, has endeavoured to impress 
upon it a character still more interesting, by adding a 
religious feeling to the respect which its age naturally 
inspires. 
' The lower part of its hollow trunk has been trans- 
formed into a Chapel of six or seven feet in diameter, 

carefully wainscotted and paved, and an open iron gate 
guards the humble Sanctuary. 
' Leading to it there is a staircase, which twists round 
the body of the Tree. At certain seasons of the year 
divine service is performed in this Chapel. 
' The summit has been broken off many years, but 
there is a surface at the top of the trunk, of the diameter 
of a very large tree, and from it rises a pointed roof, 
covered with slates, in the form of a steeple, which is 
surmounted with an iron Cross, that rises in a pic- 
turesque manner from the middle of the leaves, like an 
ancient Hermitage above the surrounding Wood. 
' Over the entrance to the Chapel an Inscription ap- 
pears, which informs us it was erected by the Abbe du 
Detroit, Curate of Allonville in the year  ; and over 
a door is another, dedicating it ' To Our Lady of Peace.' ' 
Vide  No. Saturday Magazine. 
Page . 
' To the Daisy.' 
This Poem, and two others to the same Flower, were 
written in the year  ; which is mentioned, because 
in some of the ideas, though not in the manner in which 
those ideas are connected, and likewise even in some of 
the expressions, there is a resemblance to passages in a 
Poem (lately published) of Mr. Montgomery's, entitled, a 
Field Flower. This being said, Mr. Montgomery will 
not think any apology due to him ; I cannot, however, 
help addressing him in the words of the Father of 
English Poets. 
' Though it happe me to rehersin — 
' That ye han in your freshe songis saied, 
' Forberith me, and beth not ill apaied, 
' Sith that ye se I doe it in the honour 
• Of Love, and eke in service of the Flour.' 
. 
Page . 
' The Seven Sisters.' 
The Story of this Poem is from the German of Fkede- 
bica Brun. 
Page . 
' The Waggoner.' 
Several years after the event that forms the subject of 
the Poem, in company with my friend, the late Mr. Cole- 
ridge, I happened to fall in with the person to whom the 
name of Benjamin is given. Upon our expressing regret 
that we had not, for a long time, seen upon the road 
either him or his waggon, he said :— " They could not do 
without me ; and as to the man who was put in my place, 
no good could come out of him ; he was a man of no 
ideas." 
The fact of my discarded hero's getting the horses out 
of a great difficulty with a word, as related in the poem, 
was told me by an eye-witness. 

 

NOTES. 

Page . 
' Tlie buzzing Dor-hmvk, round and round, is wheeling, — ' 
When the Poem was first written the note of the bird 
was thus described :— 
' The Night-hawk is singing his frog-like tune, 
Twirling his watchman's rattle about — ' 
but from unwillingness to startle the reader at the out- 
set by so bold a mode of expression, the passage was 
altered as it now stands. 
Page . 
After the line, ' Can any mortal clog come to Iter,' followed 
in the MS. an incident which has been kept back. Part 
of the suppressed verses shall here be given as a gratifi- 
cation of private feeling, which the well-disposed reader 
will find no difficulty in excusing. They are now printed 
for the first time. 
' Can any mortal clog come to her ? 
It can :  
But Benjamin, in his vexation, 
Possesses inward consolation ; 
He knows his ground, and hopes to find 
A spot with all things to his mind, 
■ An upright mural block of stone, 
Moist with pure water trickling down. 
A slender spring ; but kind to man 
It is, a true Samaritan ; 
Close to the highway, pouring out 
Its offering from a chink or spout ; 
Whence all, howe'er athirst, or drooping 
With toil, may drink, and without stooping. 
Cries Benjamin, ' Where is it, where ? 
Voice it hath none, but must be near." 
■ — A star, declining towards the west, 
Upon the watery surface threw 
Its image tremulously imprest, 
That just marked out the object and withdrew : 
Bight welcome service !  
Rock of Names ! 
Light is the strain, but not unjust 
To Thee, and thy memorial-trust 
That once seemed only to express 
Love that was love in idleness ; 
Tokens, as year hath followed year 
How changed, alas, in character ! 
For they were graven on thy smooth breast 
By hands of those my soul loved best ; 
Meek women, men as true and brave 
As ever went to a hopeful grave : 
Their hands and mine, when side by side 
With kindred zeal and mutual pride, 
We worked until the Initials took 
Shapes that defied a scornful look. — 
Long as for us a genial feeling 
Survives, or one in need of healing, 
The power, dear Rock, around thee cast, 
Thy monumental power, shall last 
For me and mine ! thought of pain, 
That would impair it or profane ! 
Take all in kindness then, as said 
With a staid heart but playful head ; 
And fail not Thou, loved Rock ! to keep 
Thy charge when we are laid asleep.' 
Page . 
' Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle.' 
Henry Lord Clifford, <tc. &c, who is the subject of 
this Poem, was the son of John Lord Clifford, who was slain 
at Towton Field, which John Lord Clifford, as is known 

to the reader of English History, was the person who 
after the battle of Wakefield slew, in the pursuit, the 
young Earl of Rutland, son of the Duke of York, who 
had fallen in the battle, ' in part of revenge ' (say the 
Authors of the History of Cumberland and Westmore- 
land) ; 'for the Earl's Father had slain his.' A deed 
which worthily blemished the author (saith Speed) ; but 
who, as he adds, ' dare promise any thing temperate of 
himself in the heat of martial fury ? chiefly, when it was 
resolved not to leave any branch of the York line stand- 
ing ; for so one maketh this Lord to speak.' This, no 
doubt, I would observe by the bye, was an action suffi- 
ciently in the vindictive spirit of the times, and yet not 
altogether so bad as represented; 'for the Earl was no 
child, as some writers would have him, but able to bear 
arms, being sixteen or seventeen years of age, as is evi- 
dent from this, (say the Memoirs of the Countess of 
Pembroke, who was laudably anxious to wipe away, as 
far as could be, this stigma from the illustrious name to 
which she was born,) that he was the next Child to King 
Edward the Fourth, which his mother had by Richard 
Duke of York, and that King was then eighteen years of 
age : and for the small distance betwixt her children, 
see Austin Vincent, in his Book of Nobility, p. , where 
he writes of them all. It may further be observed, that 
Lord Clifford, who was then himself only twenty-five 
years of age, had been a leading man and commander, 
two or three years together in the army of Lancaster, 
before this time ; and, therefore, would be less likely to 
think that the Earl of Rutland might be entitled to mercy 
from his youth. — But, independent of this act, at best a 
cruel and savage one, the Family of Clifford had done 
enough to draw upon them the vehement hatred of the 
House of York : so that after the Battle of Towton there 
was no hope for them but in flight and concealment. 
Henry, the subject of the Poem, was deprived of his 
estate and honours during the space of twenty-four 
years ; all which time he lived as a shepherd in York- 
shire, or in Cumberland, where the estate of his Father- 
in-law (Sir Lancelot Threlkeld) lay. He was restored to 
his estate and honours in the first year of Henry the 
Seventh. It is recorded that, 'when called to Parlia- 
ment, he behaved nobly and wisely ; but otherwise came 
seldom to London or the Court ; and rather delighted 
to live in the country, where he repaired several of 
his Castles, which had gone to decay during the late 
troubles.' Thus far is chiefly collected from Nicholson 
and Burn ; and I can add, from my own knowledge, 
that there is a tradition current in the village of Threl- 
keld and its neighbourhood, his principal retreat, that, 
in the course of his shepherd-life, he had acquired great 
astronomical knowledge. I cannot conclude this note 
without adding a word upon the subject of those nume- 
rous and noble feudal Edifices, spoken of in the Poem, 
the ruins of some of which are, at this day, so great an 
ornament to that interesting country. The Cliffords had 
always been distinguished for an honourable pride in 
these Castles ; and we have seen that, after the wars of 
York and Lancaster, they were rebuilt ; in the civil wars 
of Charles the First they were again laid waste, and 
again restored almost to their former magnificence by 
the celebrated Lady Anne Clifford, Countess of Pembroke, 
&c. &c. Not more than twenty-five years after this was 
done, when the estates of Clifford had passed into the 
Family of Tufton, three of these Castles, namely, Brough, 
Brougham, and Pendragon, were demolished, and the 
timber and other materials sold by Thomas Earl of 
Thanet. We will hope that, when this order was issued, 
the Earl had not consulted the text of Isaiah, th chap. 
th verse, to which the inscription placed over the gate 
of Pendragon Castle, by the Countess of Pembroke (I 
believe his Grandmother), at the time she repaired that 
structure, refers the reader : — ' And they that shall be of thee 
shall build the old waste places : thou sJialt raise up the foun- 
dations of many generations ; and thou shalt be called Hit 

NOTES. 

 

repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in.' The 
Earl of Thanet, the present possessor of the Estates, 
with a due respect for the memory of his ancestors, and 
a proper sense of the value and beauty of these remains 
of antiquity, has (I am told) given orders that they shall 
he preserved from all depredations. 

Page . 
'Earth helped him with the cry of blood.' 
This line is from " The Battle of Bosworth Field," by 
Sir John Beaumont (brother to the Dramatist), whose 
poems are written with much spirit, elegance, and har- 
mony ; and have deservedly been reprinted lately in 
Chalmers' Collection of English Poets. 
Page . 
' And both the undying Fish that swim 
Through Bowscale-Tarn,' ice. 
It is imagined by the people of the country that there 
are two immortal Fish, inhabitants of this Tarn, which 
lies in the mountains not far from Threlkeld.— Blenca- 
thara, mentioned before, is the old and proper name of 
the mountain vulgarly called Saddleback. 
Page . 
'Armour rusting in his Halts 
On the blood of Clifford calls.' 
The martial character of the Cliffords is well known 
to the readers of English history ; but it may not be im- 
proper here to say, by way of comment on these lines 
and what follows, that besides several others who pe- 
rished in the same manner, the four immediate Progeni- 
tors of the Person in whose hearing this is supposed to 
be spoken, all died in the Field. 
Page . 
' Dion.' 
This poem began with the following stanza, which has 
been displaced on account of its detaining the reader too 
long from the subject, and as rather precluding, than 
preparing for, the due effect of the allusion to the genius 
of Plato :— 
Fair is the Swan, whose majesty, prevailing 
O'er breeaeless water, on Locarno's lake, 
Bears him on while proudly sailing 
He leaves behind a moon-illumined wake : 
Behold ! the mantling spirit of reserve 
Fashions his neck into a goodly curve ; 
An arch thrown back between luxuriant wings 
Of whitest garniture, like fir-tree boughs 
To which, on some unruffled morning, clings 
A flaky weight of winter's purest snows ! 
— Behold ! — as with a gushing impulse heaves 
That downy prow, and softly cleaves 
The mirror of the crystal flood, 
Vanish inverted hill, and shadowy wood, 
And pendent rocks, where'er, in gliding state, 
Winds the mute Creature without visible Mate 
Or Rival, save the Queen of night 
Showering down a silver light, 
From heaven, upon her chosen Favourite ! 

Page . 
' living hill ' 

' awhile the living hill 

Heaved with convulsive throes, and all was still.' 
DK. DARWIN. 

Page . 
' TJie Wishing-gate.' 
' In the Vale of Grasmere, by the side of the old high- 
way leading to Ambleside, is a gate which, time out of 
mind, has been called the Wishing-gate.' 
Having been told, upon what I thought good authority, 
that this gate had been destroyed, and the opening, where 
it hung, walled up, I gave vent immediately to my feel- 
ings in these stanzas. But going to the place some time 
after, I found, with much delight, my old favourite 
unmolested. 
Page . 
' Something less than joy, but more than dull content.' 
COUNTESS OF WINCHILSEA. 
Page . 
' Wild Redbreast,' &c. 
This Sonnet, as Poetry, explains itself, yet the scene 
of the incident having been a wild wood, it may be 
doubted, as a point of natural history, whether the bird 
was aware that his attentions were bestowed upon a 
human, or even a living, creature. Bat a Redbreast 
will perch upon the foot of a gardener at work, and 
alight on the handle of the spade when his hand is half 
upon it — this I have seen. And under my own roof I 
have witnessed affecting instances of the creature's 
friendly visits to the chambers of sick persons, as de- 
scribed in the verses to the Redbreast, page . One of 
these welcome intruders used frequently to roost upon a 
nail in the wall, from which a picture had hung, and was 
ready, as morning came, to pipe his song in the hearing 
of the Invalid, who had been long confined to her room. 
These attachments to a particular person, when marked 
and continued, used to be reckoned ominous ; but the 
superstition is passing away. 
Page . 
The following is extracted from the journal of my 
fellow-traveller, to which, as persons acquainted with 
my poems will know I have been obliged on other occa- 
sions : — 
' Dumfries, August, . 
' On our way to the church-yard where Burns is buried, 
we were accompanied by a bookseller, who showed us 
the outside of Burns's house, where he had lived the last 
three years of his life, and where he died. It has a 
mean appearance, and is in a bye situation ; the front 
whitewashed ; dirty about the doors, as most Scotch 
houses are ; flowering plants in the window. Went to 
visit his grave ; he lies in a corner of the churchyard, 
and his second son, Francis Wallace, beside him. There 
is no stone to mark the spot ; but a hundred guineas 
have been collected to be expended upon some sort of mo- 
nument. ' There,' said the bookseller, pointing to a 
pompous monument, 'lies Mr. — (I have forgotten the 
name)— a remarkably clever man ; he was an attorney, 
and scarcely ever lost a cause he undertook. Burns 
made many a lampoon upon him, and there they rest as 
you see.' We looked at Burns's grave with melancholy 
and painful reflections, repeating to each other his own 
poet's epitaph : — 
' Is there a man, &c. 
' The churchyard is full of grave-stones and expensive 
monuments, in all sorts of fantastic shapes - obelisk- 
wise, pillar-wise, &c. When our guide had left us we 
turned again to Burns's grave, and afterwards went to 
his house, wishing to inquire after Mrs. Burns, who was 
gone to spend some time by the sea-shore with her chil- 
dren. We spoke to the maid-servant at the door, who 
invited us forward, and we sate down in the parlour. 

 

NOTES. 

The walls were coloured with a blue wash ; on one side 
of the fire was a mahogany desk; opposite the window 
a clock, which Burns mentions, in one of his letters, hay- 
ing received as a present. The house was cleanly and 
neat in the inside, the stairs of stone scoured white, the 
kitchen on the right side of the passage, the parlour on 
the left. In the room above the parlour the poet died, 
and his son, very lately, in the same room. The servant 
told us she had lived four years with Mrs. Burns, who 
was now in great sorrow for the death of Wallace. She 
said that Mrs. B.'s youngest son was now at Christ's Hos- 
pital. We were glad to leave Dumfries, where we could 
think of little but poor Burns, and his moving about on 
that unpoetic ground. In our road to Brownhill, the 
next stage, we passed Ellisland, at a little distance on 
our right — his farm-house. Our pleasure in looking 
round would have been still greater, if the road had led 
us nearer the spot. 
' I cannot take leave of this country which we passed 
through to-day, without mentioning that we saw the 
Cumberland mountains within half-a-mile of Ellisland, 
Burns's house, the last view we had of them. Drayton 
has prettily described the connexion which this neigh- 
bourhood has with ours, when he makes Skiddaw say, — 
' Scruffel, from the sky 
That Annandale doth crown, with a most amorous eye 
Salutes me every day, or at my pride looks grim, 
Oft threatening me with clouds, as I oft threaten him.' 
' These lines came to my brother's memory, as well as 
the Cumberland saving, — 
' If Skiddaw hath a cap 
Scruffel wots well of that.' 
' We talked of Burns, and of the prospect he must 
have had, perhaps from his own door, of Skiddaw and 
his companions ; indulging ourselves in the fancy that 
we might have been personally known to each other, and 
he have looked upon those objects with more pleasure 
for our sakes.' 
Page . 
' Jones ! as from Calais southward.' 
(See Dedication to Descriptive Sketches.) 
This excellent Person, one of my earliest and dearest 
friends, died in the year . We were under-graduates 
together of the same year, at the same college ; and 
companions in many a delightful ramble through his 
own romantic Country of North Wales. Much of the 
latter part of his life he passed in comparative solitude ; 
which I know was often cheered by remembrance of our 
youthful adventures, and of the beautiful regions which, 
at home and abroad, we had visited together. Our long 
friendship was never subject to a moment's interruption, 
— and, while revising these volumes for the last time, I 
have been so often reminded of my loss, with a not un- 
pleasing sadness, that I trust the Reader will excuse this 
passing mention of a Man who well deserves from me 
something more than so brief a notice. Let me only 
add, that during the middle part of his life he resided 
many years (as Incumbent of the Living) at a Parsonage 
in Oxfordshire, which is the subject of the th of the 
"Miscellaneous Sonnets," Part . 
Page . Sonnet vn. 
In this and a succeeding Sonnet on the same subject, 
let me be understood as a Poet availing himself of the 
situation which the King of Sweden occupied, and of the 
principles avowed in his manifestos ; as laying hold 
of these advantages for the purpose of embodying moral 
truths. This remark might, perhaps, as well have been 
suppressed ; for to those who may be in sympathy with 

the course of these Poems, it will be superfluous ; and 
will, I fear, be thrown away upon that other class, whose 
besotted admiration of the intoxicated despot hereafter 
placed in contrast with him, is the most melancholy evi- 
dence of degradation in British feeling and intellect 
which the times have furnished. 

Page . Sonnet xxvn. 
' Danger which they fear, and honour which they understand 
not.' 
Words in Lord Brooke's Life of Sir P. Sidney. 
Page . 
' Zaragoza.' 
In this Sonnet I am under some obligations to one of 
an Italian author, to which I cannot refer. 
Page . 
The event is thus recorded in the journals of the day : 
— ' When the Austrians took Hockheim, in one part of 
the engagement they got to the brow of the hill, whence 
they had their first view of the Rhine. They instantly 
halted — not a gun was fired — not a voice heard : they 
stood gazing on the river with those feelings which the 
events of the last fifteen years at once called up. Prince 
Schwartzenberg rode up to know the cause of this sudden 
stop ; they then gave three cheers, rushed after the 
enemy, and drove them into the water.' 
Page . 
' Thanksgiving Ode.' 
Wholly unworthy of touching upon the momentous 
subject here treated would that Poet he, before whose 
eyes the present distresses under which this kingdom 
labours could interpose a veil sufficiently thick to bide, 
or even to obscure, the splendour of this great moral 
triumph. If I have given way to exultation, unchecked 
by these distresses, it might be sufficient to protect me 
from a charge of insensibility, should I state my own 
belief that the sufferings will be transitory. Upon the 
wisdom of a very large majority of the British nation 
rested that generosity which poured out the treasures of 
this country for the deliverance of Europe : and in the 
same national wisdom, presiding in time of peace over 
an energy not inferior to that which has been displayed 
in war, they confide, who encourage a firm hope, that the 
cup of our wealth will be gradually replenished. There 
will, doubtless, be no few ready to indulge in regrets 
and repinings ; and to feed a morbid satisfaction, by 
aggravating these burthens in imagination ; in order 
that calamity so confidently prophesied, as it has not 
taken the shape which their sagacity allotted to it, may 
appear as grievous as possible under another. But the 
body of the nation will not quarrel with the gain, be- 
cause it might have been purchased at a less price : and, 
acknowledging in these sufferings, which they feel to 
have been in a great degree unavoidable, a consecration 
of their noble efforts, they will vigorously apply them- 
selves to remedy the evil. 
Nor is it at the expense of rational patriotism, or in 
disregard of sound philosophy, that I have given vent to 
feelings tending to encourage a martial spirit in the 
bosoms of my countrymen, at a time when there is a 
general outcry against the prevalence of these disposi- 
tions. The British army, both by its skill and valour in 
the field, and by the discipline which rendered it, to the 
inhabitants of the several countries where its operations 
were carried on, a protection from the violence of their 
own troops, has performed services that will not allow 
the language of gratitude and admiration to be sup- 
pressed or restrained (whatever be the temper of the ! 

NOTES. 

 

public mind) through a scrupulous dread lest the tribute 
i due to the past should prove an injurious incentive for 
the future. Every man deserving the name of Briton 
adds his voice to the chorus which extols the exploits of 
his countrymen, with a consciousness, at times overpow- 
ering the effort, that they transcend all praise. — But 
this particular sentiment, thus irresistibly excited, is not 
sufficient. The nation would err grievously, if she suf- 
fered the abuse which other states have made of military 
power to prevent her from perceiving that no people ever 
was or can be, independent, free, or secure, much less 
great, in any sane application of the word, without a cul- 
tivation of military virtues. Nor let it be overlooked, 
that the benefits derivable from these sources are placed 
■ within the reach of Great Britain, under conditions 
peculiarly favourable. The same insular position 
which, by rendering territorial incorporation impossible, 
utterly precludes the desire of conquest under the most 
seductive shape it can assume, enables her to rely, for 
her defence against foreign foes, chiefly upon a species 
of armed force from which her own liberties have nothing 
to fear. Such are the privileges of her situation ; and, 
by permitting, they invite her to give way to the courage- 
ous instincts of human nature, and to strengthen and 
refine them by culture. 
But some have more than insinuated that a design 
exists to subvert the civil character of the English people 
by unconstitutional applications and unnecessary in- 
crease of military power. The advisers and abettors of 
such a design, were it possible that it should exist, would 
be guilty of the most heinous crime, which, upon this 
planet, can be committed. Trusting that this appre- 
hension arises from the delusive influences of an honour- 
able jealousy, let me hope that the martial qualities 
which I venerate will be fostered by adhering to those 
good old usages which experience has sanctioned ; and 
by availing ourselves of new means of indisputable pro- 
mise: particularly by applying, in its utmost possible 
extent, that system of tuition whose master-spring is a 
habit of gradually enlightened subordination ; — by im- 
parting knowledge, civil, moral, and religious, in such 
measure that the mind, among all classes of the com- 
munity, may love, admire, and be prepared and accom- 
plished to defend, that country under whose protection 
its faculties have been unfolded, and its riches acquired ; 
— by just dealing towards all orders of the state, so that, 
no members of it being trampled upon,couragemay every- 
where continue to rest immoveably upon its ancient 
English foundation, personal self-respect ; — by adequate 
rewards, and permanent honours, conferred upon the 
deserving ; — by encouraging athletic exercises and manly 
sports among the peasantry of the country ; — and by 
especial care to provide and support institutions, in 
which, during a time of peace, a reasonable proportion 
of the youth of the country may be instructed in military 
science. 
I have only to add, that I should feel little satisfaction 
in giving to the world these limited attempts to celebrate 
the virtues of my country, if I did not encourage a hope 
that a subject, which it has fallen within my province to 
treat only in the mass, will by other poets be illustrated 
in that detail which its importance calls for, and which 
will allow opportunities to give the merited applause to 
peesons as well as to things. 
The ode was published along with other pieces, now 
interspersed through this volume. 
Page . 
'Discipline the rule whereof is passion.' 
Loed Beooke. 
Page . Sonnet i. 
If in this Sonnet I should seem to have borne a little 
too hard upon the personal appearance of the worthy 

Poissards of Calais, let me take shelter under the autho- 
rity of my lamented friend, the late Sir George Beaumont. 
He, a most accurate observer, used to say of them, that 
their features and countenances seemed to have con- 
formed to those of the creatures they dealt in ; at all 
events the resemblance was striking. 
Page . 
' Bruges.' 
This is not the first poetical tribute which in our times 
has been paid to this beautiful city. Mr. Southey, in the 
" Poet's Pilgrimage" speaks of it in lines which I cannot 
deny myself the pleasure of connecting with my own. 
' Time hath not wronged her, nor hath ruin sought 
Rudely her splendid structures to destroy, 
Save in those recent days, with evil fraught, 
"When mutability, in drunken joy 
Triumphant, and from all restraint released, 
Let loose her fierce and many-headed beast. 
But for the scars in that unhappy rage 
Inflicted, firm she stands and undecayed ; 
Like our first Sires, a beautiful old age 
Is hers in venerable years arrayed ; 
And yet, to her, benignant stars may bring, 
What fate denies to man, — a second spring. 
When I may read of tilts in days of old, 
And tourneys graced by Chieftains of renown, 
Fair dames, grave citizens, and warriors bold, 
If fancy would portray some stately town, 
Which for such pomp fit theatre should be, 
Fair Bruges, I shall then remember thee.' 
In this city are many vestiges of the splendour of the 
Burgandian Dukedom, and the long black mantle univer- 
sally worn by the females is probably a remnant of the 
old Spanish connection, which, if I do not much deceive 
myself, is traceable in the grave deportment of its in- 
habitants. Bruges is comparatively little disturbed by 
that curious contest, or rather conflict, of Flemish with 
French propensities in matters of taste, so conspicuous 
through other parts of Flanders. The hotel to which we 
drove at Ghent furnished an odd instance. In the pas- 
sages were paintings and statues, after the antique, of 
Hebe and Apollo ; and in the garden, a little pond, 
about a yard and a half in diameter, with a weeping 
willow bending over it, and under the shade of that tree, 
in the centre of the pond a wooden painted statue of a 
Dutch or Flemish boor, looking ineffably tender upon his 
mistress, and embracing her. A living duck, tethered at 
the feet of the sculptured lovers, alternately tormented a 
miserable eel and itself with endeavours to escape from 
its bonds and prison. Had we chanced to espy the 
hostess of the hotel in this quaint rural retreat, the 
exhibition would have been complete. She was a true 
Flemish figure, in the dress of the days of Holbein ; her 
symbol of office, a weighty bunch of keys, pendent from 
her portly waist. In Brussels, the modern taste in cos- 
tume, architecture, &c, has got the mastery ; in Ghent 
there is a struggle : but in Bruges old images are still 
paramount, and an air of monastic life among the quiet 
goings-on of a thinly-peopled city is inexpressibly sooth- 
ing ; a pensive grace seems to be cast over all, even the 
very children. — Extract from Journal. 
Page . 
' Where unremitting frosts the rocky Crescent bleach.' 
' Let a wall of rocks be imagined from three to six 
hundred feet in height, and rising between France and 
Spain, so as physically to separate the two kingdoms — 
let us fancy this wall curved like a crescent, with its 
convexity towards France. Lastly, let us suppose, that 

 

NOTES. 

in the very middle of the wall, a breach of  feet 
wide has been beaten down by the famous Roland, and 
we may have a good idea of what the mountaineers call 
the 'Breche de Roland." — Raymond's Pyrenees. 
Page . 
' Miserere Domine.' 
See the beautiful Song in Mr. Coleridge's Tragedy, 
" The Remorse." Why is the harp of Quantock silent ? 
Page . 
• Not, like his great Compeers, indignantly 
Doth Danube spring to life !' 
Before this quarter of the Black Forest was inhabited, 
the source of the Danube might have suggested some of 
those sublime images which Armstrong has so finely 
described ; at present, the contrast is most striking. 
The Spring appears in a capacious stone Basin in front 
of a Ducal palace, with a pleasure-ground opposite ; then, 
passing under the pavement, takes the form of a little, 
clear, bright, black, vigorous rill, barely wide enough 
to tempt the agility of a child five years old to leap 
over it,— and entering the garden, it joins, after a course 
of a few hundred yards, a stream much more consider- 
able than itself. The copiousness of the spring at Dones- 
chingen must have procured for it the honour of being 
named the Source of the Danube. 
Page . 
" The Staub-bach" is a narrow Stream, which, after 
a long course on the heights, comes to the sharp edge of a 
somewhat overhanging precipice, overleaps it with a 
bound, and, after a fall of  feet, forms again a rivulet. 
The vocal powers of these musical Beggars may seem to 
be exaggerated ; butthis wild and savage air was utterly 
unlike any sounds I had ever heard ; the notes reached 
me from a distance, and on what occasion they were 
sung I could not guess, only they seemed to belong, in 
some way or other, to the Waterfall — and reminded me 
of religious services chanted to Streams and Fountains 
in Pagan times. Mr. Southey has thus accurately cha- 
racterised the peculiarity of this music : ' While we were 
at the Waterfall, some half-score peasants, chiefly 
women and girls, assembled just out of reach of the 
Spring, and set up — surely, the wildest chorus that ever 
was heard by human ears, — a song not of articulate 
sounds, but in which the voice was used as a mere in- 
strument of music, more flexible than any which art 
could produce, — sweet, powerful, and thrilling beyond 
description.' — See Notes to " A Tale of Paraguay." 
Page . 
' Engelberg.' 
The Convent whose site was pointed out, according to 
tradition, in this manner, is seated at its base. The 
architecture of the building is unimpressive, but the 
situation is worthy of the honour which the imagination 
of the mountaineers has conferred upon it. 
Page . 
' Though searching damps and many an envious flaw 
Have marred this Work ; ' 
This picture of the Last Supper has not only been 
grievously injured by time, but the greatest part of it, if 
not the whole, is said to have been retouched, or painted 
over again. These niceties may be left to connoisseurs, 
— I speak of it as I felt. The copy exhibited in London 
some years ago, and the engraving by Merghen, are both 
admirable ; but in the original is a power which neither 
of those works has attained, or even approached. 

Page . 
' Of figures human and divine,' 
The Statues ranged round the spire and along the roof 
of the Cathedral of Milan, have been found fault vrith 
by persons whose exclusive taste is unfortunate for them- 
selves. It is true that the same expense and labour, 
judiciously directed to purposes more strictly architec- 
tural, might have much heightened the general effect of 
the building ; for, seen from the ground, the Statues ap- 
pear diminutive. But the coup-d'oeil, from the best point 
of view, which is half way up the spire, must strike an 
unprejudiced person with admiration ; and surely the 
selection and arrangement of the Figures is exquisitely 
fitted to support the religion of the country in the imagi- 
nations and feelings of the spectator. It was with great 
pleasure that I saw, during the two ascents which we 
made, several children, of different ages, tripping up and 
down the slender spire, and pausing to look around 
them, with feelings much more animated than could have 
been derived from these or the finest works of art, if 
placed within easy reach. — Remember also that you 
have the Alps on one side, and on the other the Apen- 
nines, with the plain of Lombardy between ! 

Page . 
' Still, with those white-robed Shapes — a living Stream, 
The glacier pillars join in solemn guise' 
This Procession is a part of the sacramental service 
performed once a month. In the valley of Engelberg we 
had the good fortune to be present at the Grand Festival 
of the Virgin — but the Procession on that day, though 
consisting of upwards of  persons, assembled from 
all the branches of the sequestered valley, was much 
less striking (notwithstanding the sublimity of the sur- 
rounding scenery) : it wanted both the simplicity of the 
other and the accompaniment of the Glacier-columns, 
whose sisterly resemblance to the moving Figures gave it 
a most beautiful and solemn peculiarity. 

Page . Sonnet xxxv. 
Near the town of Boulogne, and overhanging the beach, 
are the remains of a tower which bears the name of 
Caligula, who here terminated his western expedition, of 
which these sea-shells were the boasted spoils. And at 
no great distance from these ruins, Buonaparte, stand- 
ing upon a mound of earth, harangued his " Army of 
England," reminding them of the exploits of Csesar, and 
pointing towards the white cliffs, upon which their stand- 
ards were to float. He recommended also a subscription 
to be raised among the Soldiery to erect on that ground, 
in memory of the foundation of the " Legion of Honour," 
a Column — which was not completed at the time we were 
there. 
Page . 
 We mark majestic herds of cattle, free 
To ruminate.' 
This is a most grateful sight for an Englishman re- 
turning to his native land. Every where one missos in 
the cultivated grounds abroad, the animated and sooth- 
ing accompaniment of animals ranging and selecting 
their own food at will. 

Page . 
' Far as St. Maurice, from yon eastern Forks,' 
Les Fourches, the point at which the two chains of 
mountains part, that inclose the Valais, which termi- 
nates at St. Maurice. 

NOTES. 

 

Page G. 
' ye that occupy 

Your Council-seats beneath the open sky, 
On Sarnen's Mount,' 
Sarnen, one of the two capitals of the Canton of Under- 
waiJen ; the spot here alluded to is close to the town, 
and is called the Landenberg, from the tyrant of that 
name, whose chateau formerly stood there. On the st 
of January, , the great day which the confederated 
Heroes had chosen for the deliverance of their country, 
all the castles of the Governors were taken by force or 
stratagem ; and the Tyrants themselves conducted, with 
their creatures, to the frontiers, after having witnessed 
the destruction of their strong-holds. From that time 
the Landenberg has been the place where the Legislators 
of this division of the Canton assemble. The site, which 
is well described by Ebel, is one of the most beautiful in 
Switzerland. 
Page . 
' Calls me to pace her honoured Bridge — ' 
The bridges of Lucerne are roofed, and open at the 
sides, so that the passenger has, at the same time, the 
benefit of shade, and a view of the magnificent country. 
The pictures are attached to the rafters ; those from 
Scripture History, on the Cathedral-bridge, amount, ac- 
cording to my notes, to . Subjects from the Old Tes- 
tament face the passenger as he goes towards the 
Cathedral, and those from the New as he returns. The 
pictures on these bridges, as well as those in most other 
parts of Switzerland, are not to be spoken of as works of 
art ; but they are instruments admirably answering the 
purpose for which they were designed. 
Page . 
' Although 'tis fair, 
'Twill be another Yarrow.' 
These words were quoted to me from " Yarrow Un- 
visited," by Sir Walter Scott , when I visited him at Abbota- 
ford, a day or two before his departure for Italy : and 
the affecting condition in which he was when he looked 
upon Rome from the Janicular Mount, was reported to 
ine by a lady who had the honour of conducting him 
thither, 
Page . 
 Sis sepulchral verse.' 
If any English reader should be desirous of knowing 
how far I am justified in thus describing the epitaphs of 
Chiabrera, he will find translated specimens of them in 
this Volume, under the head of " Epitaphs and Elegiac 
Pieces." 
Page . 
' Aquapendente.' 
It would he ungenerous not to advert to the religious 
movement that, since the composition of these verses in 
, has made itself felt, more or less strongly, through- 
out the English Church ; — a movement that takes, for 
its first principle, a devout deference to the voice of 
Christian antiquity. It is not my office to pass judgment 
on questions of theological detail ; but my own repug- 
nance to the spirit and system of Romanism has been 
so repeatedly and, I trust, feelingly expressed, that I 
shall not be suspected of a leaning that way, if I do not 
join in the grave charge, thrown out, perhaps in the heat 
of controversy, against the learned and pious men to 
whose labours I allude. I speak apart from controversy ; 
but, with strong faith in the moral temper which would 
elevate the present by doing reverence to the past, I 
would draw cheerful auguries for the English Church 
from this movement, as likely to restore among us a 

tone of piety more earnest and real, than that produced 
by the mere formalities of the understanding, refusing, 
in a degree, which I cannot hut lament, that its own 
temper and judgment shall be controlled by those of 
antiquity. 
Page . 
Within a couple of hours of my arrival at Rome, I saw 
from Monte Pincio, the Pine tree as described in the 
sonnet ; and, while expressing admiration at the beauty 
of its appearance, I was told by an acquaintance of my 
fellow-traveller, who happened to join us at the moment, 
that a price had been paid for it by the late Sir G. Beau- 
mont, upon condition that the proprietor should not act 
upon his known intention of cutting it down. 
Page . 
' Camaldoli.' 
This famous sanctuary was the original establishment 
of Saint Romualdo, (or Rumwald, as our ancestors 
saxonised the name) in the th century, the ground 
(campo) being given by a Count Maldo. The Camaldo- 
lensi, however, have spread wide as a branch of Bene- 
dictines, and may therefore be classed among the gentle- 
men of the monastic orders. The society comprehends 
two orders, monks and hermits ; symbolised by their 
arms, two doves drinking out of the same cup. The 
monastery in which the monks here reside, is beautifully 
situated, but a large unattractive edifice, not unlike a 
factory. The hermitage is placed in a loftier and wilder 
region of the forest. It comprehends between  and  
distinct residences, each including for its single hermit 
an inclosed piece of ground and three very small apart- 
ments. There are days of indulgence when the hermit 
may quit his cell, and when old age arrives, he descends 
from the mountain and takes his abode among the 
monks. 
My companion had in the year , fallen in with the 
monk, the subject of these two sonnets, who showed him 
his abode among the hermits. It is from him that I re- 
ceived the following particulars. He was then about  
years of age, but his appearance was that of an older 
man. He had been a painter by profession, but on 
taking orders changed his name from Santi to Raffaello, 
perhaps with an unconscious reference as well to the 
great Sanzio d'Urbino as to the archangel. He assured 
my friend that he had been  years in the hermitage and 
had never known melancholy or ennui. In the little re- 
cess for study and prayer, there was a small collection of 
books. " I readonly," said he, "books of asceticism and 
mystical theology." On being asked the names of the 
most famous mystics, he enumerated Scaramelli, San 
Giovanni della Croce, St. Dionysius the Areopagite (sup- 
posing the work which hears his name to be really his), 
and with peculiar emphasis Ricardo di San Vittori. The 
works of Saint Theresa are also in high repute among 
ascetics. These names may interest some of my readers. 
We heard that Raffaello was then living in the con- 
vent ; my friend sought in vain to renew his acquaint- 
ance with him. It was probably a day of seclusion. 
The reader will perceive that these sonnets were sup- 
posed to be written when he was a young man. 

Page . 
 What aim had they the pair of Monks ?' 
Injustice to the Benedictines of Camaldoli, by whom 
strangers are so hospitably entertained, I feel obliged to 
notice, that I saw among them no other figures at all re- 
sembling, in size and complexion, the two Monks described 
in this Sonnet. What was their office, or the motive 
which brought them to this place of mortification, which 
they could not have approached without being carried in 
ss 

 

NOTES. 

this or some other way, a feeling of delicacy prevented 
me from inquiring. An account has before been given 
of the hermitage they were about to enter. It was visited 
by us towards the end of the month of May ; yet snow 
was lying thick under the pine-trees, within a few yards 
of the gate. 
Page . 
'At VaUombrosa.' 
The name of Milton is pleasingly connected with Val- 
lombrosa in many ways. The pride with which the Monk, 
without any previous question from me, pointed out his 
residence, I shall not readily forget. It may be proper 
here to defend the Poet from a charge which has been 
brought against him, in respect to the passage in " Para- 
dise Lost," where this place is mentioned. It is said, 
that he has erred in speaking of the trees there being de- 
ciduous, whereas they are, in fact, pines. The fault- 
finders are themselves mistaken ; the natural woods of 
the region of VaUombrosa are deciduous, and spread to a 
great extent ; those near the convent are, indeed, mostly 
pines ; but they are avenues of trees planted within a few 
steps of each other, and thus composing large tracts of 
wood ; plots of which are periodically cut down. The 
appearance of those narrow avenues, upon steep slopes 
open to the sky, on account of the height which the trees 
attain by being forced to grow upwards, is often very 
impressive. My guide, a boy of about fourteen years old, 
pointed this out to me iu several places. 
Page . 
' More high the Dacian force, 

To hoof and finger mailed !' 
Here and infra, see Forsyth. 
Page . 
' The River Duddon.' 
A Poet, whose works are not yet known as they de- 
serve to be, thus enters upon his description of the 
" Ruins of Rome :" 
■ The rising Sun 
Flames on the ruins in the purer air 
Towering aloft;' 
and ends thus — 
' The setting Sun displays 
His visible great round, between yon towers, 
As through two shady cliffs.' 
Mr. Crowe, in his excellent loco-descriptive Poem, 
" Lewesdon Hill," is still more expeditious, finishing the 
whole on a May-morning, before breakfast. 
' To-morrow for severer thought, but now 
To breakfast, and keep festival to-day.' 
No one believes, or is desired to believe, that those 
Poems were actually composed within such limits of 
time ; nor was there any reason why a prose statement 
should acquaint the Reader with the plain fact, to the 
disturbance of poetic credibility. But, in the present 
case, I am compelled to mention, that the above series of 
Sonnets was the growth of many years ; — the one which 
stands the th was the first produced ; and others were 
added upon occasional visits to the Stream, or as recol- 
lections of the scenes upon its banks awakened a wish 
to describe them. In this manner I had proceeded in- 
sensibly, without perceiving that I was trespassing upon 
gi ound pre-occupied, at least as far as intention went, 
by Mr. Coleridge ; who, more than twenty years ago, 
used to speak of writing a rural Poem, to be entitled 
" The Brook," of which he has given a sketch in a recent 
publication. But a particular subject, cannot, I think, 

much interfere with a general one ; and I have been 
further kept from encroaching upon any right Mr. C. 
may still wish to exercise, by the restriction which the 
frame of the Sonnet imposed upon me, narrowing un- 
avoidably the range of thought, and precluding, though 
not without its advantages, many graces to which a freer 
movement of verse would naturally have led. 
May I not venture, then, to hope, that, instead of 
being a hinderance, by anticipation of any part of the 
subject, these Sonnets may remind Mr. Coleridge of his 
own more comprehensive design, and induce him to fulfil 
it ? There is a sympathy in streams, — ' one calleth to 
another ; ' and I would gladly believe, that " The 
Brook" will, ere long, murmur in concert with "The 
Duddon." But, asking pardon for this fancy, I need 
not scruple to say, that those verses must indeed be i:l- 
fated which can enter upon such pleasant walks of 
nature, without receiving and giving inspiration. The 
power of waters over the minds of Poets has been 
acknowledged from the earliest ages ; — through the 
' Flumina amem sylvasque inglorius ' of Virgil, down to 
the sublime apostrophe to the great rivers of the earth, 
by Armstrong, and the simple ejaculation of Burns, 
(chosen, if I recollect right, by Mr. Coleridge, as a motto 
for his embryo " Brook,") 
' The Muse nae Poet ever fand her, 
Till by himsel' he learned to wander, 
Adown some trotting burn's meander, 
And na' think lang.' 
Page . 
' There bloomed the strawberry of the wilderness, 
The trembling eyebright showed her sapphire blue.' 
These two lines are in a great measure taken from 
" The Beauties of Spring, a Juvenile Poem," by the Rev. 
Joseph Sympson. He was a native of Cumberland, and 
was educated in the vale of Grasmere, and at Hawks- 
head school : his poems are little known, but they con- 
tain passages of splendid description ; and the versifi- 
cation of his "Vision of Alfred" is harmonious and 
animated. In describing the motions of the Sylphs, that 
constitute the strange machinery of his Poem, he uses 
the following illustrative simile : — • 
' Glancing from their plumes 

A changeful light the azure vault illumes. 
Less varying hues beneath the Pole adorn 
The streamy glories of the Boreal morn, 
That wavering to and fro then  radiance shed 
On Bothnia's gulf with glassy ice o'erspread, 
Where the lone native, as he homeward glides, 
On polished sandals o'er the imprisoned tides, 
And still the balance of his frame preserves, 
Wheeled on alternate foot in lengthening curves, 
Sees at a glance, above him and below, 
Two rival heavens with equal splendour glow. 
Sphered in the centre of the world he seems ; 
For all around with soft effulgence gleams ; 
Stars, moons, and meteors, ray opposed to ray, 
And solemn midnight pours the blaze of day,' 
He was a man of ardent feeling, and his faculties of 
mind, particularly his memory, were extraordinary. 
Brief notices of his life ought to find a place in the 
History of Westmoreland. 
Page . Sonnets xvn. <fc xvni. 
The Eagle requires a large domain for its support : 
but several pairs, not many years ago, were constantly 
resident in this country, building their nests in the steeps 
of Borrowdale, Wastdale, Ennerdale, and on the eastern 
side of Helvellyn. Often have I heard anglers speak of 
the grandeur of their appearance, as they hovered over 
Red Tarn, in one of the coves of this mountain. The 

NOTES. 

 

bird frequently returns, but is always destroyed. Not 
long since, one visited Rydal lake, and remained some 
hours near its banks : the consternation which, it occa- 
sioned among the different species of fowl, particularly 
the herons, was expressed by loud screams. The horse 
also is naturally afraid of the eagle. — There were several 
Eoman stations among these mountains ; the most con- 
siderable seems to have been in a meadow at the head of 
Windermere, established, undoubtedly, as a check over 
the Passes of Kirkstone, Dunmail-raise, and of Hardknot 
and Wrynose. On the margin of Rydal lake, a coin of 
Trajan was discovered very lately. — The Roman Fort 
here alluded to, called by the country people "Hardknot 
Castle," is most impressively situated half-way down the 
hill on the right of the road that descends from Hard- 
knot into Eskdale. It has escaped the notice of most 
antiquarians, and is but slightly mentioned by Lysons. — 
The Druidical Circle is about half a mile to the left of 
the road ascending Stone-side from the vale of Duddon : 
the country people call it " Sunken Church." 
The reader who may have been interested in the fore- 
going Sonnets, (which together may be considered as a 
Poem,) will not be displeased to find in this place a prose 
account of the Duddon, extracted from Green's compre- 
hensive Guide to the Lakes, lately published. ' The road 
leading from Coniston to Broughton is over high ground, 
and commands a view of the River Duddon ; which, at 
high water, is a grand sight, having the beautiful and 
fertile lands of Lancashire and Cumberland stretching 
each way from its margin. In this extensive view, the 
face of nature is displayed in a wonderful variety of hill 
and dale ; wooded grounds and buildings ; amongst the 
latter Broughton Tower, seated on the crown of a hill, 
rising elegantly from the valley, is an object of extraordi- 
nary interest. Fertility on each side is gradually di- 
minished, and lost in the superior heights of Blackcomb, 
in Cumberland, and the high lands between Kirkby and 
Ulverstone. 
'The road from Broughton to Seathwaite is on the 
banks of the Duddon, and on its Lancashire side it is of 
various elevations. The river is an amusing companion, 
one while brawling and tumbling over rocky precipices, 
until the agitated water becomes again calm by arriving 
at a smoother and less precipitous bed, but its course is 
soon again ruffled, and the current thrown into every 
variety of foam which the rocky channel of a river can 
give to water.' — Vide Green's Guide to the Lakes, vol. i. 
pp. —. 
After all, the traveller would be most gratified who 
should approach this beautiful Stream, neither at its 
source, as is done in the Sonnets, nor from its termina- 
tion ; but from Coniston over Walna Scar ; first descend- 
ing into a little circular valley, a collateral compartment 
of the long winding vale through which flows the 
Duddon. This recess, towards the close of September, 
when the after-grass of the meadows is still of a fresh 
green, with the leaves of many of the trees faded, but 
perhaps none fallen, is truly enchanting. At a point 
elevated enough to show the various objects in the 
valley, and not so high as to diminish their importance, 
the stranger will instinctively halt. On the foreground, 
a little below the most favourable station, a rude foot- 
bridge is thrown over the bed of the noisy brook foaming 
by the way-side. Russet and craggy hills, of bold and 
varied outline, surround the level valley, which is be- 
sprinkled with grey rocks plumed with birch trees. A 
few homesteads are interspersed, in some places peeping 
out from among the rocks like hermitages, whose site has 
been chosen for the benefit of sunshine as well as shelter ; 
in other instances, the dwelling-house, barn, and byre, 
compose together a cruciform structure, which, with its 
embowering trees, and the ivy clothing part of the walls 
and roof like a fleece, call to mind the remains of an 
ancient abbey. Time, in most cases, and nature every 
where, have given a sanctity to the humble works of 

man, that are scattered over this peaceful retirement. 
Hence a harmony of tone and colour, a consummation 
and perfection of beauty, which would have been marred 
had aim or purpose interfered with the course of conve- 
nience, utility, or necessity. This unvitiated region 
stands in no need of the veil of twilight to soften or 
disguise its features. As it glistens in the morning sun- 
shine, it would fill the spectator's heart with gladsome- 
ness. Looking from our chosen station, he would feel 
an impatience to rove among its pathways, to be greeted 
by the milkmaid, to wander from house to house, ex- 
changing ' good-morrows ' as he passed the open doors ; 
but, at evening, when the sun is set, and a pearly light 
gleams from the western quarter of the sky, with an 
answering light from the smooth surface of the meadows ; 
when the trees are dusky, but each kind still distinguish- 
able ; when the cool air has condensed the blue smoke 
rising from the cottage chimneys ; when the dark mossy 
stones seem to sleep in the bed of the foaming brook ; 
then, he would be unwilling to move forward, not less 
from a reluctance to relinquish what he beholds, than 
from an apprehension of disturbing, by his approach, the 
quietness beneath him. Issuing from the plain of this 
valley, the brook descends in a rapid torrent passing by 
the church-yard of Seathwaite. The traveller is thus 
conducted at once into the midst of the wild and beauti- 
ful scenery which gave occasion to the Sonnets from the 
th to the th inclusive. From the point where the 
Seathwaite brook joins the Duddon, is a view upwards, 
into the pass through which the river makes its way into 
the plain of Donnerdale. The perpendicular rock on the 
right bears the ancient British name of The Pen ; the 
one opposite is called "Walla-barrow Crag, a name that 
occurs in other places to designate rocks of the same 
character. The chaotic aspect of the scene is well marked 
by the expression of a stranger, who strolled out while 
dinner was preparing, and at his return, being asked by 
his host, " What way he had been wandering ? " replied, 
"As far as it is finished ! " 
The bed of the Duddon is here strewn with large 
fragments of rocks fallen from aloft ; which, as 
Mr. Green truly says, ' are happily adapted to the many- 
shaped waterfalls,' (or rather waterbreaks, for none of 
them are high,) 'displayed in the short space of half a 
mile.' That there is some hazard in frequenting these 
desolate places, I myself have had proof ; for one night 
an immense mass of rock fell upon the very spot where, 
with a friend, I had lingered the day before. ' The con- 
cussion,' says Mr. Green, speaking of the event, (for he 
also, in the practice of his art, on that day sat exposed 
for a still longer time to the same peril,) ' was heard, 
not without alarm by the neighbouring shepherds.' But 
to return to Seathwaite Church-yard : it contains the 
following inscription : — ■ 
' In memory of the Reverend Robert Walker, who died 
the th of June, , in the d year of his age, and 
th of his curacy at Seathwaite. 
' Also, of Anne his wife, who died the th of January, 
in the d year of her age.' 
In the parish-register of Seathwaite Chapel, is this 
notice: 
' Buried, June th, the Rev. Robert Walker. He was 
curate of Seathwaite sixty-six years. He was a man 
singular for his temperance, industry, and integrity.' 
This individual is the Pastor alluded to, in the 
eighteenth Sonnet, as a worthy compeer of the country 
parson of Chaucer, <&c. In the seventh book of the 
Excursion, an abstract of his character is given, begin- 
ning — 
'A Priest abides before whose life such doubts 
Fall to the ground ; — ' 
and some account of his life, for it is worthy of being 
recorded, will not be out of place here. 
s s  

R 

NOTES. 

MEMOIR OF THE REV. ROBERT "WALKER. 
In the year , Robert Walker was born at Under- 
crag, in Seathvvaite ; he was the youngest of twelve 
children. His eldest brother, who inherited the small 
family estate, died at Under-crag, aged ninety-four, 
being twenty-four years older than the subject of this 
Memoir, who was born of the same mother. Robert was 
a sickly infant ; and, through his boyhood and youth, 
continuing to be of delicate frame and tender health, it 
was deemed best, according to the country phrase, to 
breed Mm a scholar ; for it was not likely that he would 
be able to earn a livelihood by bodily labour. At that 
period few of these dales were furnished with school- 
houses ; the children being taught to read and write in 
the chapel ; and in the same consecrated building, where 
he officiated for so many years both as preacher and 
schoolmaster, he himself received the rudiments of his 
education. In his youth he became schoolmaster at 
Loweswater ; not being called upon, probably, in that 
situation to teach more than reading, writing, and 
arithmetic. But, by the assistance of a ' Gentleman ' in 
the neighbourhood, he acquired, at leisure hours, a 
knowledge of the classics, and became qualified for taking 
holy orders. Upon his ordination, he had the offer of 
two curacies : the one, Torver, in the vale of Coniston, — 
the other, Seathwaite, in his native vale. The value of 
each was the same, viz., five pounds per annum : but the 
cure of Seathwaite having a cottage attached to it, as 
he wished to marry, he chose it in preference. The 
young person on whom his affections were fixed, though 
in the condition of a domestic servant, had given pro- 
mise, by her serious and modest deportment, and by her 
virtuous dispositions, that she was worthy to become the 
helpmate of a man entering upon a plan of life such as 
he had marked out for himself. By her frugality she 
had stored up a small sum of money, with which they 
began housekeeping. In  or , he entered upon 
his curacy ; and, nineteen years afterwards, his situation 
is thus described, in some letters to be found in the 
Annual Register for , from which the following is 
extracted : — 
« To Mr. . 

' Sik, ' Coniston, July , . 
' I was the other day upon a party of pleasure, about 
five or six miles from this place, where I met with a very 
striking object, and of a nature not very common. Going 
into a clergyman's house (of whom I had frequently 
heard), I found him sitting at the head of a long square 
table, such as is commonly used in this country by the 
lower class of people, dressed in a coarse blue frock, 
trimmed with black horn buttons ; a checked shirt, a 
leathern strap about his neck for a stock, a coarse apron, 
and a pair of great wooden-soled shoes plated with iron 
to preserve them (what we call clogs in these parts), with 
a child upon his knee, eating his breakfast ; his wife, 
and the remainder of his children, were some of them 
employed in waiting upon each other, the rest in teazing 
and spinning wool, at which trade he is a great pro- 
ficient ; and moreover, when it is made ready for sale, 
will lay it, by sixteen or thirty-two pounds' weight, upon 
his back, and on foot, seven or eight miles, will carry it 
to the market, even in the depth of winter. I was not 
much surprised at all this, as you may possibly be, 
having heard a great deal of it related before. But I 
must confess myself astonished with the alacrity and 
the good humour that appeared both in the clergyman 
and his wife, and more so at the sense and ingenuity of 
the clergyman himself.'  
Then follows a letter from another person, dated , 
from which an extract shall be given. 
' By his frugality and good management, he keeps the 
wolf from the door, as we say ; and if he advances a 
little in the world, it is owing more to his own care, than 

to anything else he has to rely upon. I don't find his 
inclination is running after further preferment. He is 
settled among the people, that are happy among them- 
selves ; and lives in the greatest unanimity and friend- 
ship with them ; and, I believe, the minister and people 
are exceedingly satisfied with each other; and imleed 
how should they be dissatisfied when they have a person 
of so much worth and probity for their pastor ? A man 
who, for his candour and meekness, his sober, chaste, and 
virtuous conversation, his soundness in principle and 
practice, is an ornament to his profession, and an honour 
to the country he is in ; and bear with me if I say, the 
plainness of his dress, the sanctity of his manners, the 
simplicity of his doctrine, and the vehemence of his ex- 
pression, have a sort of resemblance to the pure practice 
of primitive Christianity.' 
We will now give his own account of himself, to be 
found in the same place. 
Fkom the Rev. Robert Walkeb. 
' Sik, — Yours of the th instant was communicated 
to me by Mr. C , and I should have returned an 
immediate answer, but the hand of Providence, then 
laying heavy upon an amiable pledge of conjugal endear- 
ment, hath since taken from me a promising girl, which 
the disconsolate mother too pensively laments the loss of; 
though we have yet eight living, all healthful, hopeful 
children, whose names and ages are as follows :— 
Zaccheus, aged almost eighteen years ; Elizabeth, six- 
teen years and ten months ; Mary, fifteen ; Moses, thir- 
teen years and three months ; Sarah, ten years and 
three months ; Mabel, eight years and three months ; 
William Tyson, three years and eight months ; and 
Anne Esther, one year and three months ; besides Anne, 
who died two years and six months ago, and was then 
aged between nine and ten ; and Eleanor, who died the 
d inst., January, aged six years and ten months. Zac- 
cheus, the eldest child, is now learning the trade of 
tanner, and has two years and a half of his apprentice- 
ship to serve. The annual income of my chapel at 
present, as near as I can compute it, may amount to 
about ., of which is paid in cash, viz., hi. from the 
bounty of Queen Anne, and . from W. P., Esq., of 
P , out of the annual rents, he being lord of the 
manor, and SI. from the several inhabitants of L , 
settled upon the tenements as a rent-charge ; the house 
and gardens I value at U. yearly, and not worth more ; 
and I believe the surplice fees and voluntary contribu- 
tions, one year with another, may be worth Zl. ■ but as 
the inhabitants are few in number, and the fees very 
low, this last-mentioned sum consists merely in free-will 
offerings. 
' I am situated greatly to my satisfaction with regard 
to the conduct and behaviour of my auditory, who not 
only live in the happy ignorance of the follies and vices 
of the age, but in mutual peace and goodwill with one 
another, and are seemingly (I hope really too) sincere 
Christians, and sound members of the established 
church, not one dissenter of any denomination being 
amongst them all. I got to the value of . for my 
wife's fortune, but had no real estate of my own, being 
the youngest son of twelve children, born of obscure 
parents ; and, though my income has been but small, 
and my family large, yet, by a providential blessing upon 
my own diligent endeavours, the kindness of friends, 
and a cheap country to live in, we have always had the 
necessaries of life. By what I have written (which is a 
true and exact account, to the best of my knowledge,) I 
hope you will not think your favour to me, out of the 
late worthy Dr. Stratford's effects, quite misbestowed, 
for which I must ever gratefully own myself, 
'Sir, 
' Your much obliged and most obedient humble Servant, 
' R. W., Curate of S . 
' To Mr. C, of Lancaster.' 

NOTES. 

 

About the time when this letter was written, the 
Bishop of Chester recommended the scheme of joining 
the curacy of Ulpha to the contiguous one of Seathwaite, 
and the nomination was offered to Mr. Walker ; but an 
unexpected difficulty arising, Mr. W., in a letter to the 
Bishop, (a copy of which, in his own beautiful hand- 
writing, now lies before me,) thus expresses himself. 
' If he,' meaning the person in whom the difficulty 
originated, ' had suggested any such objection before, I 
should utterly have declined any attempt to the curacy 
of Ulpha : indeed, I was always apprehensive it might 
be disagreeable to my auditory at Seathwaite, as they 
have been always accustomed to double duty, and the 
inhabitants of Ulpha despair of being able to support a 
schoolmaster who is not curate there also ; which sup- 
pressed all thoughts in me of serving them both.' And 
in a second letter to the Bishop he writes : — 
'My Lord, — I have the favour of yours of the st 
instant, and am exceedingly obliged on account of the 
Ulpha affair : if that curacy should lapse into your Lord- 
ship's hands, I would beg leave rather to decline than 
embrace it ; for the chapels of Seathwaite and Ulpha, 
annexed together, would be apt to cause a general dis- 
content among the inhabitants of both places ; by either 
thinking themselves slighted, being only served alter- 
nately, or neglected in the duty, or attributing it to 
covetousness in me ; all which occasions of murmuring 
I would willingly avoid.' And in concluding his former 
letter, he expresses a similar sentiment upon the same 
occasion, ' desiring, if it be possible, however, as much 
as in me lieth, to live peaceably with all men.' 
The year following, the curacy of Seathwaite was 
again augmented ; and, to effect this augmentation, fifty 
pounds had been advanced by himself; and, in , 
lands were purchased with eight hundred pounds. Scanty 
as was his income, the frequent offer of much better 
benefices could not tempt Mr. W. to quit a situation 
where he had been so long happy, with a consciousness 
of being useful. Among his papers I find the following 
copy of a letter, dated , twenty years after his re- 
fusal of the curacy of Ulpha, which will show what 
exertions had been made for one of his sons. 
'May it please your Grace, 
' Our remote situation here makes it difficult to get 
the necessary information for transacting business regu- 
larly ; such is the reason of my giving your Grace the 
present trouble. 
' The bearer (my son) is desirous of offering himself 
candidate for deacon's orders at your Grace's ensuing 
ordination ; the first, on the th instant, so that his 
papers could not be transmitted in due time. As he is 
now fully at age, and I have afforded him education to 
the utmost of my ability, it would give me great satis- 
faction (if your Grace would take him, and find him 
qualified) to have him ordained. His constitution has 
been tender for some years ; he entered the college of 
Dublin, but his health would not permit him to continue 
there, or I would have supported him much longer. He 
has been with me at home above a year, in which time 
he has gained great strength of body, sufficient, I hope, 
to enable him for performing the function. Divine Pro- 
vidence, assisted by liberal benefactors, has blest my 
endeavours, from a small income, to rear a numerous 
family ; and as my time of life renders me now unfit for 
much future expectancy from this world, I should be 
glad to see my son settled in a promising way to acquire 
an honest livelihood for himself. His behaviour, so far 
in life, has been irreproachable ; and I hope he will not 
degenerate, in principles or practice, from the precepts 
and pattern of an indulgent parent. Your ' Grace's 
favourable reception of this, from a distant corner of the 
diocese, and an obscure hand, will excite filial gratitude, 

and a due use shall be made of the obligation vouch- 
safed thereby to 
' Tour Grace's very dutiful and most obedient 
' Son and Servant, 
' Robert Walker.' 
The same man, who was thus liberal in the education 
of his numerous family, was even munificent in hos- 
pitality as a parish priest. Every Sunday, were served, 
upon the long table, at which he has been described 
sitting with a child upon his knee, messes of broth, for 
the refreshment of those of his congregation who came 
from a distance, and usually took their seats as parts of 
his own household. It seems scarcely possible that this 
custom could have commenced before the augmentation 
of his cure ; and what would to many have been a high 
price of self-denial, was paid, by the pastor and his 
family, for this gratification ; as the treat could only be 
provided by dressing at one time the whole, perhaps, of 
their weekly allowance of fresh animal food ; conse- 
quently, for a succession of days, the table was covered 
with cold victuals only. His generosity in old age may be 
still further illustrated by a little circumstance relating 
to an orphan grandson, then ten years of age, which 
I find in a copy of a letter to one of his sons ; he requests 
that half a guinea may be left for ' little Robert's pocket- 
money,' who was then at school : intrusting it to the 
care of a lady, who, as he says, ' may sometimes frustrate 
his squandering it away foolishly,' and promising to send 
him an equal allowance annually for the same purpose. 
The conclusion of the same letter is so characteristic, 
that I cannot forbear to transcribe it. ' We,' meaning 
his wife and himself, ' are in our wonted state of health, 
allowing for the hasty strides of old age knocking daily 
at our door, and threateningly telling us, we are not only 
mortal, but must expect ere long to take our leave of our 
ancient cottage, and lie down in our last dormitory. 
Pray pardon my neglect to answer yours : let us hear 
sooner from you, to augment the mirth of the Christmas 
holidays. Wishing you all the pleasures of the approach- 
ing season, I am, dear Son, with lasting sincerity, yours 
affectionately, 
' Robert Walker.' 
He loved old customs and old usages, and in some 
instances stuck to them to his own loss ; for, having had 
a sum of money lodged in the hands of a neighbouring 
tradesman, when long course of time had raised the rate 
of interest, and more was offered, he refused to accept 
it ; an act not difficult to one, who, while he was drawing 
seventeen pounds a year from his curacy, declined, as 
we have seen, to add the profits of another small bene- 
fice to his own, lest he should be suspected of cupidity. — 
From this vice he was utterly free ; he made no charge 
for teaching school ; such as could afford to pay, gave 
him what they pleased. When very young, having 
kept a diary of his expenses, however trifling, the large 
amount, at the end of the year, surprised him ; and from 
that time the rule of his life was to be economical, not 
avaricious. At his decease he left behind him no less a 
sum than . ; and such a sense of his various excel- 
lencies was prevalent in the country, that the epithet of 
wonderful is to this day attached to his name. 
There is in the above sketch something so extraordi- 
nary as to require further explanatory details. — And to 
begin with his industry ; eight hours in each day, during 
five days in the week, and half of Saturday, except 
when the labours of husbandry were urgent, he was 
occupied in teaching. His seat was within the rails of 
the altar ; the communion table was his desk ; and, like 
Shenstone's schoolmistress, the master employed himself 
at the spinning-wheel, while the children were repeating 
their lesson by his side. Every evening, after school 
hours, if not more profitably engaged, he continued the 
same kind of labour, exchanging, for the benefit of exer- 
cise, the small wheel, at which he had sate, for the large 

one on which wool is spun, the spinner stepping to and 
fro. Thus, was the wheel constantly in readiness to 
prevent the waste of a moment's time. Nor was his 
industry with the pen, when occasion called for it, less 
eager. Intrusted with extensive management of public 
and private affairs, he acted, in his rustic neighbourhood, 
as scrivener, writing out petitions, deeds of conveyance, 
wills, covenants, <tc, with pecuniary gain to himself, and 
to the great benefit of his employers. These labours 
(at all times considerable) at one period of the year, viz., 
between Christmas and Candlemas, when money trans- 
actions are settled in this country, were often so intense, 
that he passed great part of the night, and sometimes 
whole nights, at his desk. His garden also was tilled by 
his own hand ; he had a right of pasturage upon the 
mountains for a few sheep and a couple of cows, which 
required his attendance ; with this pastural occupation, 
he joined the labours of husbandry upon a small scale, 
renting two or three acres in addition to his own less 
than one acre of glebe ; and the humblest drudgery which 
the cultivation of these fields required was performed by 
himself. 
He also assisted his neighbours in haymaking and 
shearing their flocks, and in the performance of this 
latter service he was eminently dexterous. They, in 
their turn, complimented him with the present of a 
haycock, or a fleece ; less as a recompence for this par- 
ticular service than as a general acknowledgment. The 
Sabbath was in a strict sense kept holy ; the Sunday 
evenings being devoted to reading the Scripture and 
family prayer. The principal festivals appointed by 
the Church were also duly observed ; but through every 
other day in the week, through every week in the year, 
he was incessantly occupied in work of hand or mind ; not 
allowing a moment for recreation, except upon a Satur- 
day afternoon, when he indulged himself with a News- 
paper, or sometimes with a Magazine. The frugality 
and temperance established in his house, were as ad- 
mirable as the industry. Nothing to which the name of 
luxury could be given was there known ; in the latter 
part of his life, indeed, when tea had been brought into 
almost general use, it was provided for visiters, and for 
such of his own family as returned occasionally to his 
roof, and had been accustomed to this refreshment else- 
where ; but neither he nor his wife ever partook of it. 
The raiment worn by his family was comely and decent, 
but as simple as their diet ; the home-spun materials 
were made up into apparel by their own hands. At the 
time of the decease of this thrifty pair, their cottage 
contained a large store of webs r f woollen and linen 
cloth, woven from thread of their own spinning. And 
it is remarkable that the pew in the chapel in which the 
family used to sit, remains neatly lined with woollen 
cloth spun by the pastor's own hands. It is the only 
pew in the chapel so distinguished ; and I know of no 
other instance of his conformity to the delicate accom- 
modations of modern times. The fuel of the house, like 
that of their neighbours, consisted of peat, procured 
from the mosses by their own labour. The lights by 
which, in the winter evenings, their work was performed, 
were of their own manufacture, such as still continue to 
be used in these cottages ; they are made of the pith of 
rushes dipped in any unctuous substance that the house 
affords. White candles, as tallow candles are here called, 
were reserved to honour the Christmas festivals, and 
were perhaps produced upon no other occasions. Once 
a month, during the proper season, a sheep was drawn 
from their small mountain flock, and killed for the use 
of the family ; and a cow, towards the close of the year, 
was salted and dried for winter provision : the hide was 
tanned to furnish them with shoes. — By these various 
resources, this venerable clergyman reared a numerous 
family, not only preserving them, as he affectingly says, 
' from wanting the necessaries of life ; ' but affording 
them an unstinted education, and the means of raising 

themselves in society. In this they were eminently 
assisted by the effects of their father's example, his pre- 
cepts, and injunctions : he was aware that truth-speak- 
ing, as a moral virtue, is best secured by inculcating 
attention to accuracy of report even on trivial occasions • 
and so rigid were the rules of honesty by which he 
endeavoured to bring up his family, that if one of them 
had chanced to find in the lanes or fields anything of the 
least use or value without being able to ascertain to whom 
it belonged, he always insisted upon the child's carrying 
it back to the place from which it had been brought. 
No one it might be thought could, as has been de- 
scribed, convert his body into a machine, as it were, of 
industry for the humblest uses, and keep his thoughts so 
frequently bent upon secular concerns, without grievous 
injury to the more precious parts of his nature. How 
could the powers of intellect thrive, or its graces be 
displayed, in the midst of circumstances apparently so 
unfavourable, and where, to the direct cultivation of the 
mind, so small a portion of time was allotted ? But, in 
this extraordinary man, things in their nature adverse 
were reconciled. His conversation was remarkable, not 
only for being chaste and pure, but for the degree in 
which it was fervent and eloquent ; his written style 
was correct, simple, and animated. Nor did his affec- 
tions suffer more than his intellect ; he was tenderly 
alive to all the duties of his pastoral office : the poor 
and needy 'he never sent empty away,' — the stranger 
was fed and refreshed in passing that unfrequented vale 
— the sick were visited ; and the feelings of humanity 
found further exercise among the distresses and em- 
barrassments in the worldly estate of his neighbours, with 
which his talents for business made him acquainted ; 
and the disinterestedness, impartiality, and uprightness 
which he maintained in the management of all affairs 
confided to him, were virtues seldom separated in his 
own conscience from religious obligation. Nor could 
such conduct fail to remind those who witnessed it of a 
spirit nobler than law or custom : they felt convictions 
which, but for such intercourse, could not have been 
afforded, that, as in the practice of their pastor, there 
was no guile, so in his faith there was nothing hollow ; 
and we are warranted in believing, that upon these 
occasions, selfishness, obstinacy, and discord would often 
give way before the breathings of his good-will and 
saintly integrity. It may be presumed also — while his 
humble congregation were listening to the moral pre- 
cepts which he delivered from the pulpit, and to the 
Christian exhortations that they should love their neigh- 
bours as themselves, and do as they would be done 
unto — that peculiar efficacy was given to the preacher's 
labours by recollections in the minds of his congregation, 
that they were called upon to do no more than his own 
actions were daily setting before their eyes. 
The afternoon service in the chapel was less nume- 
rously attended than that of the morning, but by a more 
serious auditory ; the lesson from the New Testament, 
on those occasions, was accompanied by Burkitt's Com- 
mentaries. These lessons he read with impassioned 
emphasis, frequently drawing tears from his hearers, and 
leaving a lasting impression upon their minds. His 
devotional feelings and the powers of his own mind were 
further exercised, along with those of his family, in 
perusing the Scriptures : not only on the Sunday even- 
ings, but on every other evening, while the rest of the 
household were at work, some one of the children, 
and in her turn the servant, for the sake of practice in 
reading, or for instruction, read the Bible aloud ; and in 
this manner the whole was repeatedly gone through. 
That no common importance was attached to the ob- 
servance of religious ordinances by his family, appears 
from the following memorandum by one of his descend- 
ants, which I am tempted to insert at length, as it 
is characteristic, and somewhat curious. ' There is a 
small chapel in the county palatine of Lancaster, where 

NOTES. 

 

a certain clergyman has regularly officiated above sixty 
years, and a few months ago administered the sacrament 
of the Lord's Supper in the same, to a decent number of 
devout communicants. After the clergyman had re- 
ceived himself, the first company out of the assembly 
who approached the altar, and kneeled down to be par- 
takers of the sacred elements, consisted of the parson's 
wife ; to whom he had been married upwards of sixty 
years ; one son and his wife ; four daughters, each with 
her husband ; whose ages, all added together, amount to 
above  years. The several and respective distances 
from the place of each of their abodes, to the chapel 
where they all communicated, will measure more than 
 English miles. Though the narration will appear 
surprising, it is without doubt a fact that the same per- 
sons, exactly four years before, met at the same place, 
and all joined in performance of the same venerable duty.' 
He was indeed most zealously attached to the doctrine 
and frame of the Established Church. We have seen 
him congratulating himself that he had no dissenters in 
his cure of any denomination. Some allowance must be 
made for the state of opinion when his first religious 
impressions were received, before the reader will acquit 
him of bigotry, when I mention, that at the time of the 
augmentation of the cure, he refused to invest part of the 
money in the purchase of an estate offered to him upon 
advantageous terms, because the proprietor was a Qua- 
ker; — whether from scrupulous apprehension that a bless- 
ing would not attend a contract framed for the benefit 
of the church between persons not in religious sympathy 
with each other ; or, as a seeker of peace, he was afraid 
of the uncomplying disposition which at one time was 
too frequently conspicuous in that sect. Of this an 
instance had fallen under his own notice ; for, while he 
taught school at Loweswater, certain persons of that 
denomination had refused to pay annual interest due 
under the title of Church-stock ; a great hardship upon 
the incumbent, for the curacy of Loweswater was then 
scarcely less poor than that of Seathwaite. To what 
degree this prejudice of his was blameable need not be 
determined ; — certain it is, that he was not only desirous, 
as he himself says, to live in peace, but in love, with all 
men. He was placable, and charitable in his judgments ; 
and, however correct in conduct and rigorous to himself, 
he was ever ready to forgive the trespasses of others, and 
to soften the censure that was cast upon their frailties. — 
It would be unpardonable to omit that, in the mainte- 
nance of his virtues, he received due support from the 
partner of his long life. She was equally strict, in attend- 
ing to her share of their joint cares, nor less diligent in her 
appropriate occupations. A person who had been some 
time their servant in the latter part of their lives, con- 
cluded the panegyric of her mistress by saying to me, 
" She was no less excellent than her husband ; she was 
good to the poor ; she was good to every thing ! " He 
survived for a short time this virtuous companion. When 
she died, he ordered that her body should be borne to 
the grave by three of her daughters and one grand- 
daughter ; and, when the corpse was lifted from the 
threshold, he insisted upon lending his aid, and feeling 
about, for he was then almost blind, took hold of a 
napkin fixed to the coffin ; and, as a bearer of the 
body, entered the chapel, a few steps from the lowly 
parsonage. 
What a contrast does the life of this obscurely-seated, 
and, in point of worldly wealth, poorly-repaid Church- 
man, present to that of a. Cardinal Wolsey ! 
' 'tis a burthen, Cromwell, tis a burthen 
Too heavy for a man who hopes for heaven ! ' 

 Mr. Walker's charity being of that kind which 
' seeketh not her own,' he would rather forego his rights 
than distrain for dues which the parties liable refused, 
as a point of conscience, to pay. 

We have been dwelling upon images of peace in the 
moral world, that have brought us again to the quiet 
enclosure of consecrated ground, in which this venerable 
pair lie interred. The sounding brook, that rolls close 
by the church-yard, without disturbing feeling or medita- 
tion, is now unfortunately laid bare ; but not long ago 
it participated, with the chapel, the shade of some 
stately ash-trees, which will not spring again. While 
the spectator from this spot is looking round upon the 
girdle of stony mountains that encompasses the vale, — 
masses of rock, out of which monuments for all men 
that ever existed might have been hewn — it would sur- 
prise him to be told, as with truth he might be, that the 
plain blue slab dedicated to the memory of this aged 
pair is a production of a quarry in North Wales. It was 
sent as a mark of respect by one of their descendants 
from the vale of Festiniog, a region almost as beautiful 
as that in which it now lies ! 
Upon the Seathwaite Brook, at a small distance from 
the parsonage, has been erected a mill for spinning 
yarn ; it is a mean and disagreeable object, though not 
unimportant to the spectator, as calling to mind the 
momentous changes wrought by such inventions in the 
frame of society— changes which have proved especially 
unfavourable to these mountain solitudes. So much had. 
been effected by those new powers, before the subject of 
the preceding biographical sketch closed his life, that 
their operation could not escape his notice, and doubt- 
less excited touching reflections upon the comparatively 
insignificant results of his own manual industry. But 
Bobert Walker was not a man of times and circum- 
stances : had he lived at a later period, the principle of 
duty would have produced application as unremitting ; 
the same energy of character would have been displayed, 
though in many instances with widely-different effects. 
With pleasure I annex, as illustrative and confirma- 
tory of the above account, extracts from a paper in the 
Christian Bemembrancer, October,  : it bears an 
assumed signature, but is known to be the work of the 
Bev. Bobert Bamford, vicar of Bishopton, in the county 
of Durham ; a great-grandson of Mr. Walker, whose 
worth it commemorates, by a record not the less valuable 
for being written in very early youth. 
' His house was a nursery of virtue. All the inmates 
were industrious, and cleanly, and happy. Sobriety, 
neatness, quietness, characterised the whole family. No 
railings, no idleness, no indulgence of passion were per- 
mitted. Every child, however young, had its appointed 
engagements ; every hand was busy. Knitting, spinning, 
reading, writing, mending clothes, making shoes, were 
by the different children constantly performing. The 
father himself sitting amongst them, and guiding their 
thoughts, was engaged in the same occupations.  
' He sate up late, and rose early ; when the family 
were at rest, he retired to a little room which he had 
built on the roof of his house. He had slated it, and 
fitted it up with shelves for his books, his stock of cloth, 
wearing apparel, and his utensils. There many a cold 
winter's night, without fire, while the roof was glazed 
with ice, did he remain reading or writing till the day 
dawned. He taught the children in the chapel, for there 
was no schoolhouse. Yet in that cold, damp place he 
never had a fire. He used to send the children in parties 
either to his own fire at home, or make them run up the 
mountain side. 
« « » 
' It may be further mentioned, that he was a passionate 
admirer of Nature ; she was his mother, and he was a 
dutiful child. While engaged on the mountains, it was 
his greatest pleasure to view the rising sun ; and in 
tranquil evenings, as it slided behind the hills, he 
blessed its departure. He was skilled in fossils and 
plants ; a constant observer of the stars and winds : the 
atmosphere was his delight. He made many experiments 
on its nature and properties. In summer he used to 

gather a multitude of flies and insects, and, by his 
entertaining description, amuse and instruct his chil- 
dren. They shared all his daily employments, and 
derived many sentiments of love and benevolence from 
his observations on the works and productions of nature. 
Whether they were following him in the field, or sur- 
rounding him in school, he took every opportunity of 
storing their minds with useful information.— Nor was 
the circle of his influence confined to Seathwaite. Many 
a distant mother has told her child of Mr. Walker, and 
begged him to be as good a man. 
 
'Once, when I was very young, I had the pleasure of 
seeing and hearing that venerable old man in his th 
year, and even then, the calmness, the force, the perspi- 
cuity of his sermon, sanctified and adorned by the wis- 
dom of grey hairs, and the authority of virtue, had such 
an effect upon my mind, that I never see a hoary-headed 
clergyman, without thinking of Mr. Walker  . 
He allowed no dissenter or methodist to interfere in the 
instruction of the souls committed to his cure : and so 
successful were his exertions, that he had not one dis- 
senter of any denomination whatever in the whole parish. 
—Though he avoided all religious controversies, yet 
when age had silvered his head, and virtuous piety had 
secured to his appearance reverence and silent honour, 
no one, however determined in bis hatred of apostolic 
descent, could have listened to his discourse on eccle- 
siastical history and ancient times, without thinking, 
that one of the beloved apostles had returned to mor- 
tality, and in that vale of peace had come to exemplify 
the beauty of holiness in the life and character of 
Mr. Walker. 
 
' Until the sickness of his wife, a few months previous 
to her death, his health and spirits and faculties were 
unimpaired. But this misfortune gave him such a 
shock, that his constitution gradually decayed. His 
senses, except sight, still preserved their powers. He 
never preached with steadiness after his wife's death. 
His voice faltered : he always looked at the seat she had 
used. He could not pass her tomb without tears. He 
became, when alone, sad and melancholy, though still 
among his friends kind and good-humoured. He went 
to bed about  o'clock the night before his death. As 
his custom was, he went, tottering and leaning upon his 
daughter's arm, to examine the heavens, and meditate a 
few moments in the open air. " How clear the moon 
shines to-night ! " He said these words, sighed, and laid 
down. At six next morning he was found a corpse. 
Many a tear, and many a heavy heart, and many a 
grateful blessing followed him to the grave.' 
Having mentioned in this narrative the vale of Lowes- 
water as a place where Mr. Walker taught school, I will 
add a few memoranda from its parish register, respect- 
ing a person apparently of desires as moderate, with 
whom he must have been intimate during his residence 
there. 
' Let him that would, ascend the tottering seat 
Of courtly grandeur, and become as great 
As are his mounting wishes ; but for me, 
Let sweet repose and rest my portion be. 
Henry Fokest, Curate.' 
' Honour, the idol which the most adore, 
Receives no homage from my knee ; 
Content in privacy I value more 
Than all uneasy dignity.' 
' Henry Forest came to Loweswater, , being  
years of age.' 
' This curacy was twice augmented by Queen Anne's 
Bounty. The first payment, with great difficulty, was 
paid to Mr. John Curwen of London, on the th of May, 

, deposited by me, Henry Forest, Curate of Lowes, 
water. Y e said th of May, y e said Mr. Curwen went to 
the office, and saw my name registered there, &c. This, 
by the Providence of God, came by lot to this poor 
place. 
Hac testor H. Forest.' 
In another place he records, that the sycamore-trees 
were planted in the church-yard in . 
He died in , having been curate thirty-four years. 
It is not improbable that H. Forest was the gentleman 
who assisted Robert Walker in his classical studies at 
Loweswater. 
To this parish register is prefixed a motto, of which the 
following verses are a part : 
' Invigilate viri, tacito nam tempora gressu 
Diffugiunt, nulloque sono convertitur annus ; 
Utendum est aetate, cito pede preterit a^tas.' 
Page . 
' We feel that we are greater than we know.' 
' And feel that I am happier than I know.' — 
Milton. 
The allusion to the Greek Poet will be obvious to the 
classical reader. 
Page , 
' The White Doe of Rylstone.' 
The Poem of the White Doe of Rylstone is founded 
on a local tradition, and on the Ballad in Percy's Collec- 
tion, entitled, " The Rising of the North." The tradition 
is as follows : — ' About this time,' not long after the Dis- 
solution, 'a White Doe,' say the aged people of the 
neighbourhood, ' long continued to make a weekly pil- 
grimage from Rylstone over the fells of Bolton, and was 
constantly found in the Abbey Church-yard during divine 
service ; after the close of which she returned home as" 
regularly as the rest of the congregation.' — Da. Whit- 
aker's History of the Deanery of Craven. — Rylstone was 
the property and residence of the Nortons, distinguished 
in that ill-advised and unfortunate Insurrection ; which 
led me to connect with this tradition the principal cir- 
cumstances of their fate, as recorded in the Ballad. 
' Bolton Priory,' says Dr. Whitaker in his excellent 
book, The History and Antiquities of the Deanery of 
Craven, ' stands upon a beautiful curvature of the Wharf, 
on a level sufficiently elevated to protect it from inunda- 
tions, and low enough for every purpose of picturesque 
effect. 
' Opposite to the East window of the Priory Church, 
the river washes the foot of a rock nearly perpendicular, 
and of the richest purple, where several of the mineral 
beds, which break out, instead of maintaining their 
usual inclination to the horizon, are twisted by some in- 
conceivable process into undulating and spiral lines. 
To the South all is soft and delicious ; the eye reposes 
upon a few rich pastures, a moderate reach of the river, 
sufficiently tranquil to form a mirror to the sun, and the 
bounding hills beyond, neither too near nor too lofty to 
exclude, even in winter, any portion of his rays. 
' But, after all, the glories of Bolton are on the North. 
Whatever the most fastidious taste could require to con- 
stitute a perfect landscape, is not only found here, but in 
its proper place. In front, and immediately under the 
eye, is a smooth expanse of park-like enclosure, spotted 
with native elm, ash, &c. of the finest growth : on the 
right a skirting oak wood, with jutting points of grey 
rock ; on the left a rising copse. Still forward, are seen 
the aged groves of Bolton Park, the growth of centuries ; 
and farther yet, the barren and rocky distances of Simon- 
seat and Barden Fell contrasted with the warmth, fer- 
tility, and luxuriant foliage of the valley below. 
' About half a mile above Bolton the valley closes, and 

NOTES. 

 

either side of the Wharf is overhung hy solemn woods, 
from which huge perpendicular masses of grey rock jut 
out at intervals. 
 This sequestered scene was almost inaccessible till of 
late, that ridings have been cut on both sides of the river, 
and the most interesting points laid open by judicious 
thinnings in the woods. Here a tributary stream rushes 
from a waterfall, and bursts through a woody glen to 
mingle its waters with the Wharf: there the Wharf 
itself is nearly lost in a deep cleft in the rock, and next 
becomes a horned flood enclosing a woody island— some- 
times it reposes for a moment, and then resumes its native 
character, lively, irregular, and impetuous. 
' The cleft mentioned above is the tremendous Strid. 
This chasm, being incapable of receiving the winter 
floods, has formed on either side a broad strand of naked 
gritstone full of rock-basins, or ' pots of the Linn,' which 
bear witness to the restless impetuosity of so many Nor- 
thern torrents. But, if here Wharf is lost to the eye, it 
amply repays another sense by its deep and solemn roar, 
like 'the Voice of the angry Spirit of the Waters,' heard 
far above and beneath, amidst the silence of the sur- 
rounding woods. 
' The terminating object of the landscape is the remains 
of Barden Tower, interesting from their form and situa- 
tion, and still more so from the recollections which they 
excite.' 
Page . 
'Action is transitory — ' 
This and the five lines that follow were either read or 
recited by me, more than thirty years since, to the late 
Mr. Hazlitt, who quoted some expressions in them (im- 
perfectly remembered) in a work of his published several 
years ago. 
Page . 
' From Bolton's old monastic Tower ' 
It is to be regretted that at the present day Bolton 
Abbey wants this ornament : but the Poem, according to 
the imagination of the Poet, is composed in Queen Eliza- 
beth's time. 'Formerly,' says Dr. Whitaker, 'over the 
Transept was a tower. This is proved not only from the 
mention of bells at the Dissolution, when they could have 
had no other place, but from the pointed roof of the choir, 
which must have terminated westward, in some building 
of superior height to the ridge.' 
Page . 
'A Cluxpel, like a wild bird's nest,' 
'The Nave of the Church having been reserved at the 
Dissolution, for the use of the Saxon Cure, is still a 
parochial Chapel ; and, at this day, is as well kept as the 
neatest English Cathedral.' 
Page . 
' Who sate in the shade of the Prior's Oak !' 
'At a small distance from the great gateway stood the 
Prior's Oak, which was felled about the year , and 
sold for J . According to the price of wood at that time, 
it could scarcely have contained less than  feet of 
timber.' 
Page . 
' When Lady Aaliza mourned ' 
The detail of this tradition may be found in Dr. 
Whitaker'sbook, and in a Poem of this Collection, "The 
Force of Prayer." 
Page . 
'Pass, pass who wiU, yon chantry door; 
•At the East end of the North aisle of Bolton Priory 
Church, is a chantry belonging to Bethmesly Hall, and 

a vault, where, according to tradition, the Claphams' 
(who inherited this estate, by the female line, from the 
Mauleverers) ' were interred upright.' John de Clapham, 
of whom this ferocious act is recorded, was a man of 
great note in his time : 'he was a vehement partisan of 
the house of Lancaster, in whom the spirit of his chief- 
tains, the Cliffords, seemed to survive.' 
Page G. 
' Wlio loved the Shepherd Lord to meet ' 
In this Volume of Poems, will be found one entitled, 
" Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle, upon the Re- 
storation of Lord Clifford, the Shepherd, to the Estates 
and Honours of his Ancestors." To that Poem is an- 
nexed an account of this personage, chiefly extracted 
from Burns and Nicholson's History of Cumberland and 
Westmoreland. It gives me pleasure to add these further 
particulars concerning him, from Dr. Whitaker, who 
says he ' retired to the solitude of Barden, where he 
seems to have enlarged the tower out of a common 
keeper's lodge, and where he found a retreat equally 
favourable to taste, to instruction, and to devotion. The 
narrow limits of his residence show that he had learned 
to despise the pomp of greatness, and that a small train 
of servants could suffice him, who had lived to the age 
of thirty a servant himself. I think this nobleman re- 
sided here almost entirely when in Yorkshire, for all his 
charters which I have seen are dated at Barden. 
'His early habits, and the want of those artificial mea- 
sures of time which even shepherds now possess, had 
given him a turn for observing the motions of the heavenly 
bodies ; and, having purchased such an apparatus as 
could then be procured, he amused and informed himself 
by those pursuits, with the aid of the Canons of Bolton, 
some of whom are said to have been well versed in what 
was then known of the science. 
'I suspect this nobleman tc have been sometimes occu- 
pied in a more visionary pursuit, ana probably in the 
same company. 
' For, from the family evidences, I have met with two 
MSS. on the subject of Alchemy, which, from the charac- 
ter, spelling, &c, may almost certainly be referred to the 
reign of Henry the Seventh. If these were originally 
deposited with the MSS. of the Cliffords, it might have 
been for the use of this nobleman. If they were brought 
from Bolton at the Dissolution, they must have been the 
work of those Canons whom he almost exclusively con- 
versed with. 
' In these peaceful employments Lord Clifford spent the 
whole reign of Henry the Seventh, and the first years of 
his son. But in the year , when almost sixty years 
old, he was appointed to a principal command over the 
army which fought at Flodden, and showed that the 
military genius of the family had neither been chilled 
in him by age, nor extinguished by habits of peace. 
' He survived the battle of Flodden ten years, and died 
April rd, , aged about . I shall endeavour to 
appropriate to him a tomb, vault, and chantry, in the 
choir of the church of Bolton, as I should be sorry to 
believe that he was deposited, when dead, at a distance 
from the place which in his lifetime he loved so well. 
' By his last will he appointed his body to be interred 
at Shap, if he died in Westmoreland ; or at Bolton, if he 
died in Yorkshire. 
With respect to the Canons of Bolton, Dr. Whitaker 
shows from MSS. that not only alchemy but astronomy 
was a favourite pursuit with them. 
Page . 
' Now joy for you who from the towers 
Of Brancepeth look in doubt and fear,' 
Brancepeth Castle stands near the river Were, a few 
miles from the city of Durham. It formerly belonged 

 

NOTES. 

to the Nevilles, Earls of Westmoreland. See Dr. Percy's 
account. 
Page . 
' Of mitred Thurston — what a Host 
He conquered ! ' 
See the Historians for the account of this memorable 
battle, usually denominated the Battle of the Standard 

Page . 
 In that other day of Neville's Cross ? ' 
' In the night before the battle of Durham was strucken 
and begun, the th day of October, anno , there did 
appear to John Fosser, then Prior of the abbey of 
Durham, a "Vision, commanding him to take the holy 
Corporax-cloth, wherewith St. Cuthbert did cover the 
chalice when he used to say mass, and to put the same 
holy relique like to a banner-cloth upon the point of a 
spear, and the next morning to go and repair to a place 
on the west side of the city of Durham, called the Red 
Hills, where the Maid's Bower wont to be, and there to 
remain and abide till the end of the battle. To which 
vision, the Prior obeying, and taking the same for a 
revelation of God's grace and mercy by the mediation of 
Holy St. Cuthbert, did accordingly the next morning, 
with the monks of the said abbey, repair to the said Red 
Hills, and there most devoutly humbling and prostrating 
themselves in prayer for the victory in the said battle : 
(a great multitude of the Scots running and pressing by 
them, with intention to have spoiled them, yet had no 
power to commit any violence under such holy persons, 
so occupied in prayer, being protected and defended by 
the mighty Providence of Almighty God, and by the 
mediation of Holy St. Cuthbert, and the presence of the 
holy relique). And, after many conflicts and warlike 
exploits there had and done between the Englishmen 
and the King of Scots and his company, the said battle 
ended, and the victory was obtained, to the great over- 
throw and confusion of the Scots, their enemies : And 
then the said Prior and monks accompanied with Ralph 
Lord Nevil, and John Nevil his son, and the Lord Tercy, 
and many other nobles of England, returned home and 
went to the abbey church, there joining in hearty prayer 
and thanksgiving to God and Holy St. Cuthbert for the 
victory achieved that day.' 
This battle was afterwards called the Battle of Ne- 
ville's Cross from the following circumstance : — 
' On the west side of the city of Durham, where two 
roads pass each other, a most notable, famous, and 
goodly cross of stone-work was erected and set up to the 
honour of God for the victory there obtained in the field 
of battle, and known by the name of N evil's Cross, and 
built at the sole cost of the Lord Ralph Nevil, one of the 
most excellent and chief persons in the said battle.' The 
Relique of St. Cuthbert afterwards became of great im- 
portance in military events. For soon after this battle, 
says the same author, ' The prior caused a goodly and 
sumptuous banner to be made,' (which is then described 
at great length,) ' and in the midst of the same banner- 
cloth was the said holy relique and corporax-cloth en- 
closed, &c. <fcc, and so sumptuously finished, and ab- 
solutely perfected, this banner was dedicated to Holy 
St. Cuthbert, of intent and purpose that for the future it 
should be carried to any battle, as occasion should 
serve ; and was never carried and showed at any battle 
but by the especial grace of God Almighty, and the 
mediation of Holy St. Cuthbert, it brought home victory ; 
which banner-cloth, after the dissolution of the abbey, 
fell into the possession of Dean Whittingham, whose 
wife, called Katharine, being a French woman, (as is 
most credibly reported by eye-witnesses,) did most in- 
juriously burn the same in her fire, to the open contempt 
and disgrace of all ancient and goodly reliques.' — Ex- 

tracted from a book entitled, "Durham Cathedral, as it 
stood before the Dissolution of the Monastery." It 
appears, from the old metrical History, that the above- 
mentioned banner was carried by the Earl of Surrey to 
Flodden Field. 
Page . 
' An edifice of warlike frame 
Stands single — Norton Tower its name — ' 
It is so called to this day, and is thus described by Dr. 
"Whitaker : — Rylstone Fell yet exhibits a monument of 
the old warfare between the Nortons and Cliffords. On 
a point of very high ground, commanding an immense 
prospect, and protected by two deep ravines, are the 
remains of a square tower, expressly said by Dodsworth 
to have been built by Richard Norton. The walls are of 
strong grout-work, about four feet thick. It seems to 
have been three stories high. Breaches have been 
industriously made in all the sides, almost to the ground, 
to render it untenable. 
'But Norton Tower was probably a sort of pleasure- 
house in summer, as there are, adjoining to it, several 
large mounds, (two of them are pretty entire,) of which 
no other account can be given than that they were butts 
for large companies of archers. 
' The place is savagely wild, and admirably adapted to 
the uses of a watch tower.' 

Page . 

• ' despoil and desolation 

O'er Rylstone' s fair domain have blown; ' 
' After the attainder of Richard Norton, his estates 
were forfeited to the crown, where they remained till the 
nd or rd of James ; they were then granted to Francis 
Earl of Cumberland.' From an accurate survey made 
at that time, several particulars have been extracted by 
Dr. W. It appears that ' the mansion-house was then 
in decay. Immediately adjoining is a close, called the 
Tivery, so called, undoubtedly, from the French Vivier, 
or modern Latin Vivarium ; for there are near the house 
large remains of a pleasure-ground, such as were intro- 
duced in the earlier part of Elizabeth's time, with topiary 
works, fish-ponds, an island, &c. The whole township 
was ranged by an hundred and thirty red deer, the pro- 
perty of the Lord, which, together with the wood, had, 
after the attainder of Mr. Norton, been committed to 
Sir Stephen Tempest. The wood, it seems, had been 
abandoned to depredations, before which time it appears 
that the neighbourhood must have exhibited a forest- 
like and sylvan scene. In this survey among the old 
tenants, is mentioned one Richard Kitchen, butler to 
Mr. Norton, who rose in rebellion with his master, and 
was executed at Ripon.' 
Page . 
 In the deep fork of Amerdale ; ' 
' At the extremity of the parish of Burnsal, the valley 
of Wharf forks off into two great branches, one of which 
retains the name of Wharfdale, to the source of the 
river ; the other is usually called Littondale, but more 
anciently and properly, Amerdale. Dernbrook, which 
runs along an obscure valley from the N.W., is derived 
from a Teutonic word, signifying concealment.'— 
Dr. Whitaker. 
Page . 
' When the Bells of Rylstone played 
Their Sabbath music—' OKoD US ajtie !' ' 
On one of the bells of Rylstone church, which seems 
coeval with the building of the tower, is this cypher, 
'LM.' for John Norton, and the motto, <SoD US aj>e.' 

NOTES. 

G 

Page . 

' The grassy rock-encircled Pound ' 
Which is thus described by Dr. Whitaker :— ' On the 
plain summit of the hill are the foundations of a strong 
wall stretching from the S.W. to the N.E. corner of the 
tower, and to the edge of a very deep glen. From this 
glen, a ditch, several hundred yards long, runs south to 
another deep and rugged ravine. On the N. and W. 
where the banks are very steep, no wall or mound is 
discoverable, paling being the only fence that could stand 
on such ground. 
' From the Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, it ap- 
pears that such pounds for deer, sheep, &c. were far 
from being uncommon in the south of Scotland. The 
principle of them was something like that of a wire 
mouse-trap. On the declivity of a steep hill, the bottom 
and sides of which were fenced so as to be impassable, 
a wall was constructed nearly level with the surface on 
the outside, yet so high within, that without wings it 
was impossible to escape in the opposite direction. Care 
was probably taken that these enclosures should contain 
better feed than the neighbouring parks or forests ; and 
whoever is acquainted with the habits of these sequa- 
cious animals, will easily conceive, that if the leader was 
once tempted to descend into the snare, a herd would 
follow.' 
I cannot conclude without recommending, to the 
notice of all lovers of beautiful scenery, Bolton Abbey 
and its neighbourhood. This enchanting spot belongs 
to the Duke of Devonshire ; and the superintendence of 
it has for some years been entrusted to the Rev. William 
Carr, who has most skilfully opened out its features ; 
and, in whatever he has added has done justice to the 
place, by working with an invisible hand of art in the 
very spirit of nature. 

Page . 
' Ecclesiastical Sonnets' 
During the month of December, , I accompanied a 
much-beloved and honoured Friend in a walk through 
different parts of his estate, with a view to fix upon the 
site of a new Church which he intended to erect. It was 
one of the most beautiful mornings of a mild season, — 
our feelings were in harmony with the cherishing influ- 
ences of the scene ; and such being our purpose, we 
were naturally led to look back upon past events with 
wonder and gratitude, and on the future with hope. 
Not long afterwards, some of the Sonnets which will be 
found towards the close of this series were produced as 
a private memorial of that morning's occupation. 
The Catholic Question, which was agitated in Parlia- 
ment about that time, kept my thoughts in the same 
course ; and it struck me that certain points in the Eccle- 
siastical History of our Country might advantageously 
be presented to view in verse. Accordingly, I took up 
the subject, and what I now offer to the reader was the 
result. 
When this work was far advanced, I was agreeably 
surprised to find that my friend, Mr. Southey, had been 
engaged with similar views in writing a concise History 
of the Church in England. If our Productions, thus 
unintentionally coinciding, shall be found to illustrate 
each other, it will prove a high gratification to me, 
which I am sure my friend will participate. 

Rydal Mount, 
January , . 


W. WOKDSWORTH. 

For the convenience of passing from one point of the 
subject to another without shocks of abruptness, this 
work has taken the shape of a series of Sonnets : but the 

Reader, it is to be hoped, will find that the pictures aro 
often so closely connected as to have jointly the effect of 
passages of a poem in a form of stanza to which there 
is no objection but one that bears upon the Poet only- 
its difficulty. 
Page . 
' Did holy Paul,' Sec. 
Stillingfleet adduces many arguments in support of 
this opinion, but they are unconvincing. The latter 
part of this Sonnet refers to a favourite notion of Roman 
Catholic writers, that Joseph of Arimathea and his 
companions brought Christianity into Britain, and built 
a rude church at Glastonbury ; alluded to hereafter, in a 
passage upon the dissolution of monasteries. 
Page . 
' That Hill, whose flowery platform,' ice. 
This hill at St. Alban's must have been an object of 
great interest to the imagination of the venerable Bede, 
who thus describes it, with a delicate feeling, delightful 
to meet with in that rude age, traces of which are fre- 
quent in his works :— ' Variis herbarum floribus depictus 
imo usquequaque vestitus, in quo nihil repente arduum, 
nihil praaceps, nihil abruptum, quern lateribus longe 
lateque doductum in modum sequoris natura complanat, 
dignum videlicet eum pro insita sibi specie venustatis 
jam olim reddens, qui beati martyris cruore dicaretur.' 
Page . 
' Nor wants the cause the panic-striking aid 
Of hallelujahs ' 
Alluding to the victory gained under Germanus.— See 
Bede. 
Page . 
' By men yet scarcely conscious of a care 
For other monuments than those of Earth ; ' 
The last six lines of this Sonnet are chiefly from the 
prose of Daniel ; and here I will state (though to the 
Readers whom this Poem will chiefly interest it is unne- 
cessary) that my obligations to other prose writers are 
frequent, — obligations which, even if I had not a pleasure 
in courting, it would have been presumptuous to shun, 
in treating an historical subject. I must, however, par- 
ticularise Fuller, to whom I am indebted in the Sonnet 
upon Wicliffe and in other instances. And upon the 
acquittal of the Seven Bishops I have done little more 
than versify a lively description of that event in the MS. 
Memoirs of the first Lord Lonsdale. 
Page . Sonnet xii. 
' Ethelforth reached the convent of Bangor, he per- 
ceived the Monks, twelve hundred in number, offering 
prayers for the success of their countrymen : ' if they are 
praying against us,' he exclaimed, ' they are fighting 
against us ; ' and he ordered them to be first attacked : 
they were destroyed ; and, appalled by their fate, the 
courage of Brocmail wavered, and he fled from the field 
in dismay. Thus abandoned by their leader, his army 
soon gave way, and Ethelforth obtained a decisive con- 
quest. Ancient Bangor itself soon fell into his hands, 
and was demolished ; the noble monastery was levelled 
to the ground ; its library, which is mentioned as a large 
one, the collection of ages, the repository of the most 
precious monuments of the ancient Britons, was con- 
sumed ; half ruined walls, gates, and rubbish were all 
that remained ot the magnificent edifice.' — See Turner's 
valuable history of the Anglo-Saxons. 
Taliesin was present at the battle which preceded this 
desolation. 
The account Bede gives of this remarkable event, sug- 

 

NOTES. 

gests a most striking warning against National and Reli- 
gious pvsjudices. 
Page . Sonnet xv. 
The person of Paulinus is thus described by Bede, 
from the memory of an eye-witness : — ' Longae stature?, 
paululum incurvus, nigro capillo, facie macilenta, naso 
adunco, pertenui, venerabilis simul et terribilis aspectu.' 
Page . 
' Man's life is like a Sparrow,' 
See the original of this speech in Bede.— The Conver- 
sion of Edwin, as related by him, is highly interesting— 
and the breaking up of this Council accompanied with 
an event so striking and characteristic, that I am tempted 
to give it at length in a translation. ' "Who, exclaimed 
the King, when the Council was ended, shall first dese- 
crate the altars and the temples ? I, answered the Chief 
Priest ; for who more fit than myself, through the wis- 
dom which the true God hath given me, to destroy, for 
the good example of others, what in foolishness I wor- 
shipped ? Immediately, casting away vain superstition, 
he besought the King to grant him what the laws did not 
allow to a priest, arms and a courser (equum emissa- 
rium) ; which mounting, and furnished with a sword and 
lance he proceeded to destroy the Idols. The crowd, 
seeing this, thought him mad— he however, halted not, 
but, approaching, he profaned the temple, casting 
against it the lance which he had held in his hand, and, 
exulting in acknowledgment of the worship of the true 
God, he ordered his companions to pull down the temple, 
with all its enclosures. The place is shown where those 
idols formerly stood, not far from York, at the source of 
the river Derwent, and is at this day called Gormund 
Gaham, ubi pontifex ille, insprrante Deo vero, pollnit ac 
destruxit eas, quas ipse sacraverat aras.' The last ex- 
pression is a pleasing proof that the venerable monk of 
Wearmouth was familiar with the poetry of Virgil. 
Page . 
' such the inviting voice 
Heard near fresh streams ;' 
The early propagators of Christianity were accustomed 
to preach near rivers, for the convenience of baptism. 
Page . Sonnet xix. 
Having spoken of the zeal, disinterestedness, and tem- 
perance of the clergy of those times, Bede thus proceeds : 
— ' Unde et in magna erat veneratione tempore illo re- 
ligionis habitus, ita ut ubicunque clericus aliquis, aut 
monachus adveniret, gaudenter ab omnibus tanquam 
Dei famulus exciperetur. Etiam si in itinere pergens 
inveniretur, accurrebant, et flexa cervice, vel manu sig- 
nari, vel ore illius se benedici, gaudebant. Verbis quoque 
horum exhortatoriis diligenter auditum praebebant. Lib. 
iii. cap. . 
Page . 
' The people work like congregated bees' 
See, in Turner's History, vol. iii. p. , the account of 
the erection of Ramsey Monastery. Penances were 
removable by the performance of acts of charity and 
benevolence. 
Page . 
'pain narrows not his cares.' 
Through the whole of his life, Alfred was subject to 
grievous maladies. 
Page . 
' Woe to the Crown that doth the Cowl obey ! ' 
The violent measures carried on under the influence of 
Dunstan, for strengthening the Benedictine Order, were a 

leading cause of the second series of Danish invasions. — 
See Turner. 
Page . 
' Here Man more purely lives,' <kc. 
•Bonum est nos hie esse, quia homo vivit purius, cadit 
rarius, surgit velocius, incedit eautius, quiescit securius, 
moritur felicius, purgatur citius, praemiatur copiosius.' 
Bernard. ' This sentence,' says Dr. Whitaker, ' ig 
usually inscribed in some conspicuous part of the Cister- 
tian houses.' 
Page . 
' Whom Obloquy pursues with hideous bark : ' 
The list of foul names bestowed upon those poor 
creatures is long and curious ; — and, as is, alas ! too 
natural, most of the opprobrious appellations are drawn 
from circumstances into which they were forced by their 
persecutors, who even consolidated their miseries into 
one reproachful term, calling them Patarenians, or Pa. 
turins, from pati, to suffer. 
Dwellers with wolves, she names them, for the pine 
And green oak are their covert ; as the gloom 
Of night oft foils their enemy's design, 
She calls them Riders on the flying broom ; 
Sorcerers, whose frame and aspect have become 
One and the same through practices malign. 
Page . 
' And the green lizard and the gilded newt 
Lead unmolested lives, and die of age.' 
These two lines are adopted from a MS., written about 
the year , which accidentally fell into my possession. 
The close of the preceding Sonnet on monastic voluptu- 
ousness is taken from the same source, as is the verse, 
' Where Venus sits,' &c, and the line, ' Once ye were 
holy, ye are holy still,' in a subsequent Sonnet. 
Page . 
' One ( like those prophets whom Ood sent of old ) 
Transfigured,' <£c. 
' M. Latimer suffered his keeper very quietly to pull off 
his hose, and his other array, which to looke unto was 
very simple : and being stripped into his shrowd, he 
seemed as comely a person to them that were present, as 
one should lightly see : and whereas in his clothes hee ap- 
peared a withered and crooked sillie (weak) olde man, he 
now stood bolt upright, as comely a father as one might 
lightly behold.  « Then they brought a faggotte, 
kindled with fire, and laid the same downe at doctor 
Ridley's feete. To whome M. Latimer spake in this 
manner, ' Bee of good comfort, master Ridley, and play 
the man : wee shall this day light such a candle by God's 
grace in England, as I trust shall never bee put out.' — 
Fox's Acts, £e. 
Similar alterations in the outward figure and deport- 
ment of persons brought to like trial were not uncom- 
mon. See note to the above passage in Dr. Wordsworth's 
Ecclesiastical Biography, for an example in an humble 
Welsh .fisherman. 
Page . 
' The gift exalting, and with playful smile : ' 
' On foot they went, and took Salisbury in their way, 
purposely to see the good Bishop, who made Mr. Hooker 
sit at his own table ; which Mr. Hooker boasted of with 
much joy and gratitude when he saw his mother and 
friends ; and at the Bishop's parting with him, the Bishop 
gave him good counsel and his benediction, but forgot to 
give him money ; which when the Bishop had considered, 
he sent a servant in all haste to call Richard back to 

NOTES. 

 

him, and at Richard's return, the Bishop said to him, 
' Richard, I sent for you back to lend you a horse which 
hath carried me many a mile, and I thank God with 
much ease,' and presently delivered into his hand a walk- 
ing-staff, with which he professed he had travelled 
through many parts of Germany ; and he said, ' Richard, 
I do not give, but lend you my horse ; be sure you be 
honest, and bring my horse back to me, at your return 
this way to Oxford. And I do now give you ten groats to 
bear your charges to Exeter ; and here is ten groats more, 
which I charge you to deliver to your mother, and tell 
her I send her a Bishop's benediction with it, and beg 
the continuance of her prayers for me. And if you bring 
my horse back to me, I will give you ten groats more to 
carry you on foot to the college ; and so God bless you, 
good Richard.' ' — SeeWalton's Life of Richard Hooker. 
Page . 
■ ' craftily incites 

The overweening, personates the mad.' 
A common device in religious and political conflicts. 
— See Strype in support of this instance. 

Page . 
' Laud,' 
In this age a word cannot be said in praise of Laud, or 
even in compassion for his fate, without incurring a 
charge of bigotry ; but fearless of such imputation, I con- 
cur with Hume, ' that it is sufficient for his vindication 
to observe that his errors were the most excusable of all 
those which prevailed during that zealous period.' A key 
to the right understanding of those parts of his conduct 
that brought the most odium upon him in his own time, 
maybe found in the following passage of his speech 
before the bar of the House of Peers :— ' Ever since I 
came in place, I have laboured nothing more than that 
the external publick worship of God, so much slighted in 
divers parts of this kingdom, might be preserved, and 
that with as much decency and uniformity as might be. 
For I evidently saw that the public neglect of God's ser- 
vice in the outward face of it, and the nasty lying of 
many places dedicated to that service, had almost cast a 
damp upon the true and inward worship of God, which while 
we live in the body, needs external helps, and all little enough 
to keep it in any vigour.' 
Page . 
' The Pilgrim Fathers.' 
American episcopacy, in union with the church in 
England, strictly belongs to the general subject ; and I 
here make my acknowledgments to my American friends, 
Bishop Doane, and Mr. Henry Reed of Philadelphia, for 
having suggested to me the propriety of adverting to it, 
and pointed out the virtues and intellectual qualities of 
Bishop White, which so eminently fitted him for the great 
work he undertook. Bishop White was consecrated at 
Lambeth, Feb. , , by Archbishop Moore ; and before 
his long life was closed, twenty-six bishops had been con- 
secrated in America, by himself. For his character and 
opinio is, see his own numerous Works, and a " Sermon 
in commemoration of him, by George Washington Doane, 
Bishop of New Jersey." 
Page . 
'A genial hearth 
And a refined rusticity, belong 
To the neat mansion,' 
Among the benefits arising, as Mr. Coleridge has well 
observed, from a Church establishment of endowments 
corresponding with the wealth of the country to which 

it belongs, may be reckoned as eminently important, 
the examples of civility and refinement which the Clergy 
stationed at intervals, afford to the whole people. Tba 
established clergy in many parts of England have long 
been, as they continue to be, the principal bulwark 
against barbarism, and the link which unites the seques- 
tered peasantry with the intellectual advancement of the 
age. Nor is it below the dignity of the subject to observe, 
that their taste, as acting upon rural residences and 
scenery often furnishes models which country gentlemen, 
who are more at liberty to follow the caprices of fashion, 
might profit by. The precincts of an old residence must 
be treated by ecclesiastics with raspect, both from pru- 
dence and necessity. I remember being much pleased, 
some years ago, at Rose Castle, the rural seat of the See 
of Carlisle, with a style of garden and architecture, 
which, if the place had belonged to a wealthy layman, 
would no doubt have been swept away. A parsonage- 
house generally stands not far from the church ; this 
proximity imposes favourable restraints, and sometimes 
suggests an affecting union of the accommodations and 
elegances of life with the outward signs of piety and 
mortality. With pleasure I recal to mind a happy 
instance of this in the residence of an old and much- 
valued Friend in Oxfordshire. The house and church 
stand parallel to each other, at a small distance ; a cir- 
cular lawn or rather grass-plot, spreads between them ; 
shrubs and trees curve from each side of the dwelling, 
veiling, but not hiding, the church. From the front of 
this dwelling, no part of the burial-ground is seen ; but 
as you wind by the side of the shrubs towards the steeple- 
end of the church, the eye catches a single, small, low, 
monumental headstone, moss-grown, sinking into, and 
gently inclining towards the earth. Advance, and the 
churchyard, populous and gay with glittering tombstones, 
opens upon the view. This humble, and beautiful par- 
sonage called forth a tribute, for which see the seventh 
of the " Miscellaneous Sonnets," Part . 
Page . Sonnet xxxn. 
This is still continued in many churches in Westmore- 
land. It takes place in the month of July, when the 
floor of the stalls is strewn with fresh rushes ; and hence 
it is called the ' Rush-bearing.' 
Page . 
' Teaching us to forget them or forgive.' 
This is borrowed from an affecting passage in Mr. 
George Dyer's history of Cambridge. 
Page . 
' had we, like them, endured 
Sore stress of apprehension,' 
See Burnet, who is unusually animated on this subject ; 
the east wind, so anxiously expected and prayed for, was 
called the ' Protestant wind.' 
Page . 
' Yet will we not conceal the precious Cross, 
Like men ashamed : ' 
The Lutherans have retained the Cross within their 
churches : it is to be regretted that we have not done the 
same. 
Page . 
' Or like the Alpine Mount, that takes its name 
From roseate hues,' &c. 
Some say that Monte Rosa takes its name from a belt 
of rock at its summit— a very unpoetical and scarcely a 
probable supposition. 

 

NOTES. 

MEMORIALS OF A TODR IN SCOTLAND, . 

' Highland Hut.' 
This sonnet describes the exteriot of a Highland hut, 
as often seen under morning or evening sunshine. To 
the authoress of the " Address to the Wind," and other 
poems, in this volume, who was my fellow-traveller in 
this tour, I am indebted for the following extract from 
her journal, which accurately describes, under particular 
circumstances, the beautiful appearance of the interior of 
one of these rude habitations. 
' On our return from the Trossachs the evening began 
to darken, and it rained so heavily that we were com- 
pletely wet before we had come two miles, and it was 
dark when we landed with our boatman, at his hut upon 
the banks of Loch Katrine. I was faint from cold : the 
good woman had provided, according to her promise, a 
better fire than we had found in the morning ; and, 
indeed, when I sat down in the chimney-corner of her 
smoky biggin, I thought I had never felt more comfort- 
able in my life : a pan of coffee was boiling for us, and, 
having put our clothes in the way of drying, we all sat 
down thankful for a shelter. We could not prevail upon 
our boatman, the master of the house, to draw near the 
fire, though he was cold and wet, or to suffer his wife to 
get him dry clothes till she had served us, which she did 
most willingly, though not very expeditiously. 
' A Cumberland man of the same rank would not have 
had such a notion of what was fit and right in his own 
house, or, if he had, one would have accused him of ser- 
vility ; but in the Highlander it only seemed like polite- 
ness (however erroneous and painful to us), naturally 
growing out of the dependence of the inferiors of the 
clan upon their laird ; he did not, however, refuse to let 
his wife bring out the whisky bottle for his refreshment, 
at our request. " She keeps a dram," as the phrase is : 
indeed, I believe there is scarcely a lonely house by the 
wayside, in Scotland, where travellers may not be ac- 
commodated with a dram. We asked for sugar, butter, 
barley-bread, and milk ; and, with a smile and a stare 
more of kindness than wonder, she replied, " Ye'll get 
that," bringing each article separately. We caroused 
our cups of coffee, laughing like children at the strange 
atmosphere in which we were : the smoke came in gusts, 
and spread along the walls ; and above our heads in the 
chimney (where the hens were roosting) it appeared like 
clouds in the sky. We laughed and laughed again, in 
spite of the smarting of our eyes, yet had a quieter plea- 
sure in observing the beauty of the beams and rafters 
gleaming between the clouds of smoke : they had been 
crusted over, and varnished by many winters, till, where 
the firelight fell upon them, they had become as glossy 
as black rocks, on a sunny day, cased in ice. When we 
had eaten our supper we sat about half an hour, and I 
think I never felt so deeply the blessing of a hospitable 
welcome and a warm fire. The man of the house re- 
peated from time to time that we should often tell of this 
night when we got to our homes, and interposed praises 
of his own lake, which he had more than once, when we 
were returning in the boat, ventured to say was " bon- 
nier than Loch Lomond." Our companion from the 
Trossachs, who, it appeared, was an Edinburgh draw- 
ing-master going, during the vacation, on a pedestrian 
tour to John o'Groat's house, was to sleep in the barn 
with my fellow-travellers, where the man said he had 
plenty of dry hay. I do not believe that the hay of the 
Highlands is ever very dry, but this year it had a better 
chance than usual : wet or dry, however, the next morn- 
ing they said they had slept comfortably. When I went 
to bed, the mistress, desiring me to "go ben," attended 
me with a candle, and assured me that the bed was 
dry, though not " sic as I had been used to." It was of 
chaff; there were two others in the room, a cupboard 

and two chests, upon one of which stood milk in wooden 
vessels, covered over. The walls of the house were of 
stone unplastered : it consisted of three apartments, the 
cowhouse at one end, the kitchen or house in the middle 
and the spence at the other end ; the rooms were divided 
not up to the rigging, but only to the beginning of the 
roof, so that there was a free passage for light and smoke 
from one end of the house to the other. I went to bed 
some time before the rest of the family; the door was 
shut between us, and they had a bright fire, which I 
could not see, but the light it sent up amongst the var. 
nished rafters and beams, which crossed each other 
in almost as intricate and fantastic a manner as I have 
seen the under-boughs of a large beech tree withered by 
the depth of shade above, produced the most beautiful effect 
that can be conceived. It was like what I should sup. 
pose an underground cave or temple to be, with a drip, 
ping or moist roof, and the moonlight entering in upon 
it by some means or other ; and yet the colours were 
more like those of melted gems. I lay looking up till 
the light of the fire faded away, and the man and his 
wife and child had crept into their bed at the other end 
of the room : I did not sleep much, but passed a com- 
fortable night ; for my bed, though hard, was warm and 
clean : the unusualness of my situation prevented me 
from sleeping. I could hear the waves beat against the 
shore of the lake ; a little rill close to the door made a 
much louder noise, and, when I sat up in my bed, I could 
see the lake through an open window-place at the bed's 
head. Add to this, it rained all night. I was less occu- 
pied by remembrance of the Trossachs, beautiful as they 
were, than the vision of the Highland hut, which I could 
not get out of my head ; I thought of the Faery-land of 
Spenser, and what I had read in romance at other times ; 
and then what a feast it would be for a London Panto- 
mime-maker could he but transplant it to Drury-lane, 
with all its beautiful colours ! ' — MS. 
Page . 
' Once on those steeps  roamed' 
The following is from the same MS., and gives an ac- 
count of the visit to Bothwell Castle here alluded to : — 
' It was exceedingly delightful to enter thus unexpect- 
edly upon such a beautiful region. The castle stands 
nobly, overlooking the Clyde. When we came up to it, 
I was hurt to see that flower-borders had taken place of 
the natural overgrowings of the ruin, the scattered stones, 
and wild plants. It is a large and grand pile of red free- 
stone, harmonising perfectly with the rocks of the river, 
from which, no doubt, it has been hewn. When I was a 
little accustomed to the unnaturalness of a modern 
garden, I could not help admiring the excessive beauty 
and luxuriance of some of the plants, particularly the 
purple-flowered clematis, and a broad-leafed creeping 
plant without flowers, which scrambled up the castle 
wall, along with the ivy, and spread its vine-like branches 
so lavishly that it seemed to be in its natural situation, 
and one could not help thinking that, though not self- 
planted among the ruins of this country, it must some- 
where have its native abode in such places. If Bothwell 
Castle had not been close to the Douglas mansion, we 
should have been disgusted with the possessor's miser- 
able conception of adorning such a venerable ruin ; 
but it is so very near to the house, that of necessity tne 
pleasure-grounds must have extended beyond it, and 
perhaps the neatness of a shaven lawn and the complete 
desolation natural to a ruin might have made an un- 
pleasing contrast ; and, besides being within the pre- 
cincts of the pleasure-grounds, and so very near to the 
dwelling of a noble family, it has forfeited, in some de- 
gree, its independent majesty, and becomes a tributary 
to the mansion : its solitude being interrupted, it has no 
longer the command over the mind in sending it back 
into past times, or excluding the ordinary feelings which 
we bear about us in daily life. We had then only to re- 

NOTES. 


 

gret that the castle and the house were so near to each 
other ; and it was impossible not to regret it ; for the 
ruin presides in state over the river, far from city or 
town, as if it might have a peculiar privilege to preserve 
its memorials of past ages, and maintain its own charac- 
ter for centuries to come. "We sat upon a bench under 
the high trees, and had beautiful views of the different 
reaches of the river, above and below. On the opposite 
bank, which is finely wooded with elms and other trees, 
are the remains of a priory built upon a rock ; and rock 
and ruin are so blended, that it is impossible to separate 
the one from the other. Nothing can be more beautiful 
than the little remnant of this holy place : elm trees (for 
ne were near enough to distinguish them by their 
branches) grow out of the walls, and overshadow a 
small, but very elegant window. It can scarcely be con- 
ceived what a grace the castle and priory impart to each 
other ; and the river Clyde flows on, smooth and unruf- 
fled below, seeming to my thoughts more in harmony 
with the sober and stately images of former times, than 
if it had roared over a rocky channel, forcing its sound 
upon the ear. It blended gently with the warbling of the 
smaller birds, and the chattering of the larger ones, that 
had made their nests in the ruins. In this fortress the 
chief of the English nobility were confined after the 
battle of Bannockburn. If a man is to be a prisoner, he 
scarcely could have a more pleasant place to solace his 
captivity ; but I thought that, for close confinement, I 
should prefer the banks of a lake, or the seaside. The 
greatest charm of a brook or river is in the liberty to 
pursue it through its windings : you can then take it in 
whatever mood you like; silent or noisy, sportive or 
quiet. The beauties of a brook or river must be sought, 
and the pleasure is in going in search of them ; those of 
a lake or of the sea come to you of themselves. These 
rude warriors cared little, perhaps, about either ; and yet, 
if one may judge from the writings of Chaucer, and from 
the old romances, more interesting passions were con- 
nected with natural objects in the days of chivalry than 
now ; though going in search of scenery, as it is called, 
had not then been thought of. I had previously heard 
nothing of Both well Castle, at least nothing that I remem- 
bered ; therefore, perhaps, my pleasure was greater, 
compared with what I received elsewhere, than others 
might feel.' — MS. Journal. 

Page . 
' Hartfs-horn Tree.' 
' In the time of the first Robert de Clifford, in the year 
 or , Edward Baliol king of Scotland came into 
Westmoreland, and stayed some time with the said 
Robert at his castles of Appleby, Brougham, and Pen- 
dragon. And during that time they ran a stag by a 
single greyhound out of Whinfell Park to Redkirk, in 
Scotland, and back again to this place ; where, being 
both spent, the stag leaped over the pales, but died on 
the other side ; and the greyhound, attempting to leap, 
fell, and died on the contrary side. In memory of this 
fact the stag's horns were nailed upon a tree just by, and 
(the dog being named Hercules) this rhythm was made 
upon them. : 
' Hercules kill'd Hart a greese, 
And Hart a greese kill'd Hercules.' 
The tree to this day bears the name of Hart's-horn Tree. 
The horns in process of time were almost grown over by 
the growth of the tree, and another pair was put up in 
their place.' — Nicholson and Burns's History of Westmore- 
land and Cumberland. 
The tree has now disappeared, but I well remember its 
imposing appearance as it stood, in a decayed state, by 
the side of the high road leading from Penrith to Appleby. 
This whole neighbourhood abounds in interesting tradi- 
tions and vestiges of antiquity, viz., Julian's Bower ; 

Brougham and Penrith Castles ; Penrith Beacon, and the 
curious remains in Penrith Church-yard; Arthur's Round 
Table, and, close by, Maybrougb ; the excavation, called 
the Giant's Cave, on the banks of the Emont; Long Meg 
and her Daughters, near Eden, &c. &c. 
Page . 
' Wings at my shoulders seem to play.' 
In these lines I am under obligation to the exquisite 
picture of "Jacob's Dream," by Mr. Alstone, now in 
America. It is pleasant to make this public acknow- 
ledgment to a man of genius, whom I have the honour 
to rank among my Mends. 
Page . 
'But if thou, like Cocytus,' &c. 
Many years ago, when I was at Greta Bridge, in York- 
shire, the hostess of the inn, proud of her skill in etymo- 
logy, said, that "the name of the river was taken from 
the bridge, the form of which, as every one must notice, 
exactly resembled a great A." Dr. Wbitaker has derived 
it from the word of common occurrence in the north of 
England, "to greet j" signifying to lament aloud, mostly 
with weeping: a conjecture rendered more probable from 
the stony and rocky channel of both the Cumberland and 
Yorkshire rivers. The Cumberland Greta, though it 
does not, among the country people, take up that name 
till within three miles of its disappearance in the river 
Derwent, may be considered as having its source in the 
mountain cove of Wythburn, and flowing through Thirl- 
mere, the beautiful features of which lake are known only 
to those who, travelling between Grasmere and Keswick, 
have quitted the main road in the vale of Wythburn, 
and, crossing over to the opposite side of the lake, have 
proceeded with it on the right hand. 
The channel of the Greta, immediately above Keswick, 
has, for the purposes of building, been in a great measure 
cleared of the immense stones which, by their concussion 
in high floods, produced the loud and awful noises de- 
scribed in the sonnet. 
' The scenery upon this river,' says Mr. Southey in his 
Colloquies, 'where it passes under the woody side of 
Latrigg, is of the finest and most rememberable kind : — 
' ambiguo lapsu refluitque fluitque, 
Occurrensque sibi venturas aspicit undas.' 
Page . 
'By hooded votaresses,' &c. 
Attached to the church of Brigham was formerly a 
chantry, which held a moiety of the manor ; and in the 
decayed parsonage some vestiges of monastic architecture 
are still to be seen. 
Page . 
' Mary Queen of Scots landing at Workington.' 
' The fears and impatience of Mary were so great,' says 
Robertson, 'that she got into a fisher-boat, and with 
about twenty attendants landed at Workington, in Cum- 
berland ; and thence she was conducted with many 
marks of respect to Carlisle.' The apartment in which 
the Queen had slept at Workington Hall (where she was 
received by Sir Henry Curwen as became her rank and 
misfortunes) was long preserved, out of respect to her 
memory, as she had left it ; and one cannot but regret 
that some necessary alterations in the mansion could not 
be effected without its destruction. 
Page . 
St. Bees' Heads, anciently called the ClifF of Baruth, 
are a conspicuous sea-mark for all vessels sailing in the 
N.E. parts of the Irish Sea. In a bay, one side of which 

is formed by the southern headland, stands the village 
of St. Bees ; a place distinguished, from very early times, 
for its religious and scholastic foundations. 
'St. Bees,' say Nicholson and Burns, 'had its name 
from Bega, an holy woman from Ireland, who is said to 
have founded here, about the year of our Lord , a 
small monastery, where afterwards a church was built in 
memory of her. 
' The aforesaid religious house, being destroyed by the 
Banes, was restored by William de Meschiens, son of 
Ranulph, and brother of Ranulph de Meschiens, first 
Earl of Cumberland after the Conquest: and made a cell 
of a prior and six Benedictine monks to the Abbey of St. 
Mary at York.' 
Several traditions of miracles, connected with the 
foundation of the first of these religious houses, sur- 
vive among the people of the neighbourhood ; one of 
which is alluded to in these Stanzas ; and another, of a 
somewhat bolder and more peculiar character, has fur- 
nished the subject of a spirited poem by the Rev. R. 
Parkinson, M.A., late Divinity Lecturer of St. Bees' 
College, and now Fellow of the Collegiate Church of 
Manchester. 
After the dissolution of the monasteries, Archbishop 
Grindal founded a free school at St. Bees, from which the 
counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland have derived 
great benefit ; and recently, under the patronage of the 
Earl of Lonsdale, a college has been established there 
for the education of ministers for the English Church. 
The old Conventual Church has been repaired under the 
superintendence of the Rev. Dr. Ainger, the Head of the 
College ; and is well worthy of being visited by any 
strangers who might be led to the neighbourhood of this 
celebrated spot. 
The form of stanza in this Poem, and something 
in the style of versification, are adopted from the " St. 
Monica," a poem of much beauty upon a monastic 
subject, by Charlotte Smith : a lady to whom English 
verse is under greater obligations than are likely to be 
either acknowledged or remembered. She wrote little, 
and that little unambitiously, but with true feeling for 
rural nature, at a time when nature was not much re- 
garded by English Poets ; for in point of time her earlier 
writings preceded, I believe, those of Cowper and Burns. 

Page . 
' Are not, in sooth, their Requiems sacred ties ' 
I am aware that I am here treading upon tender 
ground ; but to the intelligent reader I feel that no 
apology is due. The prayers of survivors, during pas- 
sionate grief for the recent loss of relatives and friends, 
as the object of those prayers could no longer be the 
suffering body of the dying, would naturally be ejaculated 
for the souls of the departed ; the barriers between the 
two worlds dissolving before the power of love and faith. 
The ministers of religion, from their habitual attendance 
upon sick-beds, would be daily witnesses of these benign 
results ; and hence would be strongly tempted to aim at 
giving to them permanence, by embodying them in rites 
and ceremonies, recurring at stated periods. All this, as 
it was in course of nature, so was it blameless, and even 
praiseworthy ; since some of its effects, in that rude 
state of society, could not but be salutary. No reflecting 
person, however, can view without sorrow the abuses 
which rose out of thus formalising sublime instincts, and 
disinterested movements of passion, and perverting them 
into means of gratifying the ambition and rapacity of the 
priesthood. But, while we deplore and are indignant at 
these abuses, it would be a great mistake if we imputed 
the origin of the offices to prospective selfishness on the 
part of the monks and clergy : they were at first sincere 
In their sympathy, and in their degree dupes rather of 
their own creed, than artful and designing men. Charity 
is, upon the whole, the safest guide that we can take in 

judging our fellow-men, whether of past ages, or of the 
present time. 
Page . 
' And they are led by noble Biliary.' 
The Tower of Refuge, an ornament to Douglas Bay, 
was erected chiefly through the humanity and zeal of Sir 
William Hillary ; and he also was the founder of the life- 
boat establishment, at that place ; by which, under his 
superintendence, and often by his exertions at the immi- 
nent hazard of his own life, many seamen and passengers 
have been saved. 
Page . 
' By a retired Mariner.' 
This unpretending sonnet is by a gentleman nearly 
connected with me, and I hope, as it falls so easily into 
its place, that both the writer and the reader will excuse 
its appearance here. 
Page . 
' Off with yon cloud, old Snafell ! ' 
The summit of this mountain is well chosen by Cowley 
as the scene of the " Vision," in which the spectral angel 
discourses with him concerning the government of Oliver 
Cromwell. 'I found myself,' says he, 'on the top of that 
famous hill in the Island Mona, which has the prospect 
of three great, and not long since most happy, kingdoms. 
As soon as ever I looked upon them, they called forth the 
sad representation of all the sins and all the miseries 
that had overwhelmed them these twenty years.' It is 
not to be denied that the changes now in progress, aud 
the passions, and the way in which they work, strikingly 
resemble those which led to the disasters the philosophic 
writer so feelingly bewails. God grant that the resem- 
blance may not become still more striking as months and 
years advance ! 
Page . 
' On revisiting DunoUy Castle.' 
This ingenious piece of workmanship, as I afterwards 
learned, had been executed for their own amusement by 
some labourers employed about the place. 
Page . 
 Cave of Staffa.' 
The reader may be tempted to exclaim, " How came 
this and the two following sonnets to be written, after 
the dissatisfaction expressed in the preceding one ? " In 
fact, at the risk of incurring the reasonable displeasure 
of the master of the steam-boat, I returned to the cave, 
and explored it under circumstances more favourable to 
those imaginative impressions which it is so wonder- 
fully fitted to make upon the mind. 
Page . 
' Hope smiled when your nativity was cast, 
Children of summer ! ' 
Upon the head of the eolumns which form the front of 
the cave, rests a body of decomposed basaltic matter, 
which was richly decorated with that large bright 
flower, the ox-eyed daisy. I had noticed the same flower 
growing with profusion among the bold rocks on the 
western coast of the Isle of Man; making a brilliant 
contrast with their black and gloomy surfaces. 
Page . 
' lona.' 
The four last lines of this sonnet are adopted from a 
well-known sonnet of Russel, as conveying my feeling 
better than any words of my own could do. 

Page . 
' Yet fetclied from Paradise.' 
It is to be feared that there is more of the poet than 
the sound etymologist in this derivation of the name 
Eden. On the western coast of Cumberland is a rivulet 
which enters the sea at Moresby, known also in the 
neighbourhood by the name of Eden. May not the 
latter syllable come from the word Dean, a valley ? 
Langdale, near Ambleside is by the inhabitants called 
Langden. The former syllable occurs in the name 
Emont, a principle feeder of the Eden ; and the stream 
which flows, when the tide is out, over Cartmel Sands, 
is called the Ea — eau, French — aqua, Latin. 
Page . 
' Canal, and Viaduct, and Railway, teU ! ' 
At Corby, a few miles below Nunnery, the Eden is 
crossed by a magnificent viaduct ; and another of these 
works is thrown over a deep glen or ravine at a very 
short distance from the main stream. 
Page . 
' A weight of awe not easy to be borne.' 
The daughters of Long Meg, placed in a perfect circle 
eighty yards in diameter, are seventy-two in number 
above ground ; a little way out of the circle stands Long 
Meg herself, a single stone, eighteen feet high. When I 
first saw this monument, as I came upon it by surprise, 
I might over-rate its importance as an object ; but, 
though it will not bear a comparison with Stonehenge, 
I must say, I have not seen any other relique of those 
dark ages, which can pretend to rival it in singularity 
and dignity of appearance. 
Page . 
' To the Earl of Lonsdale.' 
This sonnet was written immediately after certain 
trials, which took place at the Cumberland Assizes, 
when the Earl of Lonsdale, in consequence of repeated 
and long-continued attacks upon his character, through 
the local press, had thought it right to prosecute the 
conductors and proprietors of three several journals. 
A verdict of libel was given in one case ; and, in the 
others, the prosecutions were withdrawn, upon the indi- 
viduals retracting and disavowing the charges, express- 
ing regret that they had been made, and promising to 
abstain from the like in future. 
Page . 
' Descending to the worm in charity ; 
I am indebted, here, to a passage in one of Mr. Digby's 
valuable works. 
Page . 
' All change is perilous, and all chance unsound.' 

SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBEETT AND ORDER. 
Page . 
' Men of the Western World.' 
These lines were written several years ago, when 
reports prevailed of cruelties committed in many parts 
of America, by men making a law of their own passions. 
A far more formidable, as being a more deliberate mis- 
chief, has appeared among those States, which have 
lately broken faith with the public creditor in a manner 
so infamous. I cannot, however, but look at both evils 
under a similar relation to inherent good, and hope that 
the time is not distant when our brethren of the West 
will wipe off this stain from their name and nation. 

Page . 
' The Horn of Egremont Castle.' 
This story is a Cumberland tradition. I have heard 
it also related of the Hall of Hutton John, an ancient 
residence of the Hudleston's, in a sequestered valley 
upon the river Dacor. 
Page . 
' The Russian Fugitive.' 
Peter Henry Brace, having given in his entertaining 
Memoirs the substance of this Tale, affirms that, besides 
the concurring reports of others, he had the story from 
the lady's own mouth. 
The Lady Catherine, mentioned towards the close, is 
the famous Catherine, then bearing that name as the 
acknowledged Wife of Peter the Great. 
Page . 
' The Farmer of Tilsbury Vale.' 
With this picture, which was taken from real life, 
compare the imaginative one of " The Reverie of Poor 
Susan," p.  ; and see (to make up the deficiencies of 
this class) " The Excursion," passim. 
Page . 
'Moss Campion (Silene acaulis).' 
This most beautiful plant is scarce in England, though 
it is found in great abundance upon the mountains of 
Scotland. The first specimen I ever saw of it, in its 
native bed, was singularly fine, the tuft or cushion being 
at least eight inches in diameter, and the root propor- 
tionably thick. I have only met with it in two places 
among our mountains, in both of which I have since 
sought for it in vain. 
Botanists will not, I hope, take it ill, if I caution them 
against carrying off, inconsiderately, rare and beautiful 
plants. This has often been done, particularly from In- 
gleborough and other mountains in Yorkshire, till the 
species have totally disappeared, to the great regret of 
lovers of nature living near the places where they grew. 
Page . 
'From the most gentle creature nursed in fields.' 
This way of indicating the name of my lamented friend 
has been found fault with ; perhaps rightly so ; but I may 
say in justification of the double sense of the word, that 
similar allusions are not uncommon in epitaphs. One of 
the best in our language in verse, I ever read, was upon 
a person who bore the name of Palmer ; and the course 
of the thought, throughout, turned upon the Life of the 
Departed, considered as a pilgrimage. Nor can I think 
that the objection in the present case will have much 
force with any one who remembers Charles Lamb's beau- 
tiful sonnet addressed to his own name, and ending — 
' No deed of mine shall shame thee, gentle name !' 

Walter Scott . 
S. T. Coleridge 
Charles Lamb . 
Geo. Crabbe 
Felicia Hemans 

Page . 
. died st Sept., . 
. „ th July, . 
. „ th Dec, . 
. „ rd Feb., . 
„ th May, . 

Preface to the Excdrsion. Page . 
' Descend, prophetic Spirit, that inspirest 
The human soul,' &c, 
'Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic Soul 
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come.' 
Shakspeare's Sonnets. 
T T 

 

NOTES. 

Page . 
' much did he see of Men.' 
At the risk of giving a shock to the prejudices of arti- 
ficial society, I have ever been ready to pay homage to 
the aristocracy of nature ; under a conviction that vigor- 
ous human-heartedness is the constituent principle of 
true taste. It may still, however, be satisfactory to have 
prose testimony how far a Character, employed for pur- 
poses of imagination, is founded upon general fact. I, 
therefore, subjoin an extract from an author who had 
opportunities of being well acquainted with a class of 
men, from whom my own personal knowledge emboldened 
me to draw this portrait. 
' We learn from Caesar and other Roman Writers, that 
the travelling merchants who frequented Gaul and other 
barbarous countries, either newly conquered by the Ro- 
i man arms, or bordering on the Roman conquests, were 
ever the first to make the inhabitants of those countries 
familiarly acquainted with the Roman modes of life, and 
to inspire them with an inclination to follow the Roman 
fashions, and to enjoy Roman conveniences. In North 
America, travelling merchants from the Settlements 
have done and continue to do much more towards 
civilising the Indian natives, than all the missionaries, 
papist or protestant, who have ever been sent among 
them. 
It is farther to be observed, for the credit of this most 
useful class of men, that they commonly contribute, by 
their personal manners, no less than by the sale of their 
wares, to the refinement of the people among whom they 
travel. Their dealings form them to great quickness of 
wit and acuteness of judgment. Having constant occa- 
sion to recommend themselves and their goods, they 
acquire habits of the most obliging attention, and the 
most insinuating address. As in their peregrinations 
they have opportunity of contemplating the manners of 
various men and various cities, they become eminently 
skilled in the knowledge of the world. As they wander, 
each alone, through thinly-inhabited districts, they form 
habits of reflection and of sublime contemplation. With all 
these qualifications, no wonder, that they should often 
be, in remote parts of the country, the best mirrors of 
fashion, and censors of manners ; and should contribute 
much to polish the roughness, and soften the rusticity of 
our peasantry. It is not more than twenty or thirty years 
since a young man going from any part of Scotland to 
England, of purpose to carry the pack, was considered as 
going to lead the life and acquire the fortune of a gen- 
tleman. When, after twenty years' absence, in that 
honourable line of employment, he returned with his ac- 
quisitions to his native country, he was regarded as a 
gentleman to all intents and purposes.' 
Heron's Journey in Scotland, Vol. i. p. . 

Page . 
' Lost in unsearchable Eternity !' 
Since this paragraph was composed, I have read with 
so much pleasure, in Burnet's Theory of the Earth, a 
passage expressing corresponding sentiments, excited by 
objects of a similar nature, that I cannot forbear to 
transcribe it. 
' Siquod verb Natura nobis dedit spectaculum, in hac 
tellure, vere gratum, et philosopho dignum, id semel 
niihi contigisse arbitror ; cum ex celsissima. rupe specu- 
labundus ad oram maris Mediterranei, hinc sequor cseru- 
leum, illinc tractus Alpinos prospexi ; nihil quidem 
magls dispar aut dissimile, nee in suo genere, magis 
egregium et singulare. Hoc theatrum ego facile praetu- 
lerim Romanis cunctis, Graecisve ; atque id quod natura 
hlc spectarvdum exhibet, scenicis ludis omnibus, aut 
amphitheatri certaminibus. Nihil hie elegans aut ve- 

nustum, sed ingens et magnificum, et quod placet mag- 
nitudine sua. et quadam specie immensitatis. Hinc in- 
tuebar maris asquabilem superficiem, usque et usque 
diffusam, quantum maximum oculorum acies ferri potuit; 
illinc disruptissimam terras faciem, et vastas moles varie 
elevatas aut depressas, erectas, propendentes, reclinatas, 
coacervatas, omni situ inaequali et turbido. Placuit, ex 
hac parte, Natura; unitas et simplicitas, et inexhausta 
quaedam planities ; ex altera, multiformis confusio mag- 
norum corporum, et insanae rerum strages : quas cum 
intuebar, non urbis alieujus aut oppidi, sed confracti 
mundi rudera, ante oculos habere mihi visus sum. 
In singulis fere montibus erat aliquid insolens etmira- 
bile, sed pras ceeteris mihi placebat ilia, qua. sedebam, 
rupes ; erat maxima et altissima, et qua, terram respicie. 
bat, molliori ascensu altitudinem suam dissimulabat : 
qu vero mare, horrendum praeceps, et quasi ad perpen- 
diculum facta, instar parietis. Praeterea facies ilia 
marina adeo erat laovis ac uniformis (quod in rupibus 
aliquando observare licet) ac si scissa fuisset a summo 
ad imum, in illo piano ; vel terras motu aliquo, aut ful- 
mine, divulsa. 
Ima pars rupis erat cava, recessusque habuit, et saxeos 
specus, euntes in vacuum montem ; sive natura pridem 
factos, sive exesos mari, et undarum crebris ictibus : In 
hos enim cum impetu ruebantetfragore, aestuantis maris 
fiuctus ; quos iterum spumantes reddidit antrum, et 
quasi ab imo ventre evomuit. 
Dextrum latus montis erat praeruptum, aspero saxo et 
nuda caute ; sinistrum non adeo neglexerat Natura, ar- 
boribus utpote ornatum : et prope pedem montis rivus 
limpidae aquae prorupit ; qui cum vicinam vallem irriga- 
verat, lento motu serpens, et per varios maeandros, quasi 
ad protrahendam vitam, in magno mari absorptus subito 
periit. Denique in summo vertice promontorii, commode 
eminebat saxum, cui insidebam contemplabundus. Vale 
augusta sedes, Rege digna : Augusta rupes, semper mihi 
memoranda !' P. . Telluris Theoria sacra, &c. Editio 
secunda. 
Page . 
' Of Missisippi, or tjtat Northern Stream.' 
' A man is supposed to improve by going out into the 
World, by visiting London. Artificial man does ; he ex- 
tends with his sphere ; but, alas ! that sphere is micro- 
scopic ; it is formed of minutiae, and he surrenders his 
genuine vision to the artist, in order to embrace it in his 
ken. His bodily senses grow acute, even to barren and 
inhuman pruriency; while his mental become propor- 
tionally obtuse. The reverse is the Man of Mind : he 
who is placed in the sphere of Nature and of God, might 
be a mock at Tattersall's and Brooks's, and a sneer at 
St. James's : he would certainly be swallowed alive by 
the first Pizarro that crossed him : — But when he walks 
along the river of Amazons ; when he rests his eye on 
the unrivalled Andes ; when he measures the long and 
watered savannah ; or contemplates, from a sudden pro- 
montory, the distant, vast Pacific — and feels himself a 
freeman in this vast theatre, and commanding each 
ready produced fruit of this wilderness, and each pro- 
geny of this stream — his exaltation is not less than im- 
perial. He is as gentle, too, as he is great : his emotions 
of tenderness keep pace with his elevation of sentiment ; 
for he says, ' These were made by a good Being, who, 
unsought by me, placed me here to enjoy them.' He 
becomes at once a child and a king. His mind is in him- 
self ; from hence he argues, and from hence he acts, and 
he argues unerringly, and acts magisterially : his mind 
in himself is also in his God ; and therefore he loves, and 
therefore he soars.' — From the notes upon The Hurricane, 
a Poem, by WUliam Gilbert. 
The Reader, I am sure, will thank me for the above 
quotation, which, though from a strange book, is one of 
the finest passages of modern English prose. 

NOTES. 

 

Page . 
"Tis, by comparison, an easy task 
Earth to despise,' &c. 
See, upon this subject, Baxter's most interesting re- 
view of his own opinions and sentiments in the decline 
of life. It may be found (lately reprinted) in Dr. Words- 
worth's Ecclesiastical Biography. 
Page . 
 Alas ! the endowment of immortal Power, 
Is matched unequally with custom, time,' &c. 
This subject is treated at length in the Ode — Intima- 
tions of Immortality, page . 
Page . 
'Knowing the heart of Man is set to be,' &c. 
The passage quoted from Daniel is taken from a poem 
addressed to the Lady Margaret, Countess of Cumber- 
land, and the two last lines, printed in Italics, are by him 
translated from Seneca. The whole Poem is very beau- 
tiful. I will transcribe four stanzas from it, as they con- 
tain an admirable picture of the state of a wise Man's 
mind in a time of public commotion. 
Nor is he moved with all the thunder-cracks 
Of tyrant's threats, or with the surly brow 
Of Power, that proudly sits on others' crimes ; 
Charged with more crying sins than those he checks. 
The storms of sad confusion that may grow 
Up in the present for the coming times, 
Appal not him; that hath no side at all, 
But of himself, and knows the worst can fall. 
Although his heart (so near allied to earth) 
Cannot but pity the perplexed state 
Of troublous and distressed mortality, 
That thus make way unto the ugly birth 
Of their own sorrows, and do still beget 
Affliction upon Imbecility : 
Yet seeing thus the course of things must run, 
He looks thereon not strange, but as fore-done. 
And whilst distraught ambition compasses, 
And is encompassed, while as craft deceives, 
And is deceived : whilst man doth ransack man, 
And builds on blood, and rises by distress ; 
And th' Inheritance of desolation leaves 
To great-expecting hopes : He looks thereon, 
As from the shore of peace, with unwet eye, 
And bears no venture in Impiety. 
Thus, Lady, fares that man that hath prepared 
A rest for his desires ; and sees all things 
Beneath him ; and hath learned this book ef man, 
Full of the notes of frailty ; and compared 
The best of glory with her sufferings : 
By whom, I see, you labour all you can 
To plant your heart ! and set your thoughts as near 
His glorious mansion as your powers can bear. 

Page . 
 Or rather, as we stand on holy earth 
And have the dead around us.' 
Leo. You, Sir, could help me to the history 
Of half these graves ? 
Priest. For eight-score winters past, 
With what I've witnessed, and with what I've 
heard, 
Perhaps I might ; — — — — — 
By turning o'er these hillocks one by one, 

We two could travel, Sir, through a strange 
round ; 
Yet all in the broad highway of the world. 
See the Brothers. 
Page . 
■ And suffering Nature grieved that one should die.' 
Southey's Retrospect. 
Page . 
' And whence that tribute ? wherefore these regards ? ' 
The sentiments and opinions here uttered are in unison 
with those expressed in the following Essay upon Epi- 
taphs, which was furnished by me for Mr. Coleridge's 
periodical work, the Friend ; and as they are dictated by 
a spirit congenial to that which pervades this and the 
two succeeding books, the sympathising reader will not 
be displeased to see the Essay here annexed. 

ESSAY UPON EPITAPHS. 
It needs scarcely be said, that an Epitaph presupposes 
a Monument, upon which it is to be engraven. Almost 
all Nations have wished that certain external signs 
should point out the places where their dead are in- 
terred. Among savage tribes unacquainted with letters 
this has mostly been done either by rude stones placed 
near the graves, or by mounds of earth raised over 
them. This custom proceeded obviously from a twofold 
desire ; first, to guard the remains of the deceased from 
irreverent approach or from savage violation : and, se- 
condly, to preserve their memory. ' Never any,' says Cam- 
den, ' neglected burial but some savage nations ; as the 
Bactrians, which cast their dead to the dogs ; some var- 
let philosophers, as Diogenes, who desired to be devoured 
of fishes ; some dissolute courtiers, as Maecenas, who 
was wont to say, Non tumulum euro; sepelit natura re- 
lictos. 
I'm careless of a grave : — Nature her dead will save.' 
As soon as nations had learned the use of letters, epi- 
taphs were inscribed upon these monuments ; in order 
that their intention might be more surely and adequately 
fulfilled. I have derived monuments and epitaphs from 
two sources of feeling : but these do in fact resolve them- 
selves into one. The invention of epitaphs, Weever, in 
his Discourse of Funeral Monuments, says rightly, ' pro- 
ceeded from the presage or fore-feeling of immortality, 
implanted in all men naturally, and is referred to the 
scholars of Linus the Theban poet, who flourished about 
the year of the world two thousand seven hundred ; who 
first bewailed this Linus their Master, when he was slain, 
in doleful verses, then called of him CElina, afterwards 
Epitaphia, for that they were first sung at burials, after 
engraved upon the sepulchres.' 
And, verily, without the consciousness of a principle of 
immortality in the human soul, Man could never have 
had awakened in bim the desire to live in the remem- 
brance of his fellows : mere love, or the yearning of kind 
towards kind, could not have produced it. The dog or 
horse perishes in the field, or in the stall, by the side of 
his companions, and is incapable of anticipating the 
sorrow with which his surrounding associates shall be- 
moan his death, or pine for his loss ; he cannot pre-con- 
ceive this regret, he can form no thought of it ; and 
therefore cannot possibly have a desire to leave such 
regret or remembrance behind him. Add to the prin- 
ciple of love which exists in the inferior animals, the 
faculty of reason which exists in Man alone ; will the 
conjunction of these account for the desire ? Doubtless 
it is a necessary consequence of this conjunction ; yet 
not I think as a direct result, but only to be come at 
T T  

 

NOTES. 

through an intermediate thought, viz. that of an inti- 
mation or assurance within us, that some part of our 
nature is imperishable. At least the precedence, in order 
of birth, of one feeling to the other, is unquestionable. 
If we look back upon the days of childhood, we shall 
find that the time is not in remembrance when, with 
respect to our own individual Being, the mind was with- 
out this assurance ; whereas, the wish to be remembered 
by our friends or kindred after death, or even in 
absence, is, as we shall discover, a sensation that does 
not form itself till the social feelings have been developed, 
and the Reason has connected itself with a wide range of 
objects. Forlorn, and cut off from communication with 
the best part of his nature, must that man be, who should 
derive the sense of immortality, as it exists in the mind 
of a child, from the same unthinking gaiety or liveliness 
of animal spirits with which the lamb in the meadow, 
or any other irrational creature is endowed ; who should 
ascribe it, in short, to blank ignorance in the child ; to 
an inability arising from the imperfect state of his facul- 
ties to come, in any point of his being, into contact with 
a notion of death ; or to an unreflecting acquiescence in 
what had been instilled into him ! Has such an unfolder 
of the mysteries of nature, though he may have forgotten 
his former self, ever noticed the early, obstinate, and 
unappeasable inquisitiveness of children upon the subject 
of origination ? This single fact proves outwardly the 
monstrousness of those suppositions : for, if we had no 
direct external testimony that the minds of very young 
children meditate feelingly upon death and immortality, 
these inquiries, which we all know they are perpetually 
making concerning the whence, do necessarily include 
correspondent habits of interrogation concerning the 
whither. Origin and tendency are notions inseparably 
co-relative. Never did a child stand by the side of a 
running stream, pondering within himself what power 
was the feeder of the perpetual current, from what never- 
wearied sources the body of water was supplied, but he 
must have been inevitably propelled to follow this 
question by another: "Towards what abyss is it in 
progress ? what receptacle can contain the mighty in- 
flux ?" And the spirit of the answer must have been, 
though the word might be sea or ocean, accompanied 
perhaps with an image gathered from a map, or from 
the real object in nature — these might have been the 
letter, but the sj?irit of the answer must have been as 
inevitably, — a receptacle without bounds or dimensions ; 
— nothing less than infinity. We may, then, be justified 
in asserting, that the sense of immortality, if not a co- 
existent and twin birth with Reason, is among the 
earliest of her offspring : and we may further assert, 
that from these conjoined, and under their countenance, 
the human affections are gradually formed and opened 
out. This is not the place to enter into the recesses of 
these investigations ; but the subject requires me here 
to make a plain avowal, that, for my own part, it is to 
me inconceivable, that the sympathies of love towards 
each other, which grow with our growth, could ever 
attain any new strength, or even preserve the old, after 
we had received from the outward senses the impression 
of death, and were in the habit of having that impression 
daily renewed and its accompanying feeling brought 
home to ourselves, and to those we love ; if the same 
were not counteracted by those communications with 
our internal Being, which are anterior to all these expe- 
riences, and with which revelation coincides, and has 
through that coincidence alone (for otherwise it could 
not possess it) a power to affect us. I confess, with me 
the conviction is absolute, that, if the impression and 
sense of death were not thus counterbalanced, such a 
hollowness would pervade the whole system of things, 
such a want of correspondence and consistency, a dispro- 
portion so astounding betwixt means and ends, that there 
could be no repose, no joy. Were we to grow up unfos- 
tered by this genial warmth, a frost would chill the 

sph'it, so penetrating and powerful, that there could be 
no motions of the life of love ; and infinitely less could 
we have any wish to be remembered after we had passed 
away from a world in which each man had moved about 
like a shadow. — If, then, in a creature endowed with the 
faculties of foresight and reason, the social affections 
could not have unfolded themselves uncountenanced by 
the faith that Man is an immortal being ; and if, con- 
sequently, neither could the individual dying have had 
a desire to survive in the remembrance of his fellows, 
nor on their side could they have felt a wish to preserve 
for future times vestiges of the departed ; it follows, as 
a final inference, that without the belief in immortality, 
wherein these several desires originate, neither monu- 
ments nor epitaphs, in affectionate or laudatory com- 
memoration of the deceased, could have existed in the 
world. 
Simonides, it is related, upon landing in a strange 
country, found the corse of an unknown person lying 
by the sea-side ; he buried it, and was honoured through- 
out Greece for the piety of that act. Another ancient 
Philosopher, chancing to fix his eyes upon a dead body, 
regarded the same with slight, if not with contempt; 
saying, " See the shell of the flown bird ! " But it is not 
to be supposed that the moral and tender-hearted Simo- 
nides-was incapable of the lofty movements of thought, 
to which that other Sage gave way at the moment while 
his soul was intent only upon the indestructible being ; 
nor, on the other hand, that he, in whose sight a lifeless 
human body was of no more value than the worthless 
shell from which the living fowl had departed, would 
not, in a different mood of mind, have been affected by 
those earthly considerations which had incited the 
philosophic Poet to the performance of that pious duty. 
And with regard to this latter we may be assured that, 
if he had been destitute of the capability of communing 
with the more exalted thoughts that appertain to human 
nature, he would have cared no more for the corse of 
the stranger than for the dead body of a seal or porpoise 
which might have been cast up by the waves. We 
respect the corporeal frame of Man, not merely because 
it is the habitation of a rational, but of an immortal 
Soul. Each of these Sages was in sympathy with the 
best feelings of our nature ; feelings which, though they 
seem opposite to each other, have another and a finer 
connection than that of contrast. — It is a connection 
formed through the subtle progress by which, both in 
the natural and the moral world, qualities pass insen- 
sibly into their contraries, and things revolve upon each 
other. As, in sailing upon the orb of this planet, a 
voyage towards the regions where the sun sets, conducts 
gradually to the quarter where we have been accus- 
tomed to behold it come forth at its rising ; and, in like 
manner, a voyage towards the east, the birth-place in 
our imagination of the morning, leads finally to the 
quarter where the sun is last seen when he departs from 
our eyes ; so the contemplative Soul, travelling in the 
direction of mortality, advances to the country of ever- 
lasting life ; and, in like manner, may she continue to 
explore those cheerful tracts, till she is brought back, 
for her advantage and benefit, to the land of transitory 
things — of sorrow and of tears. 
On a midway point, therefore, which commands the 
thoughts and feelings of the two Sages whom we have 
represented in contrast, does the Author of that species 
of composition, the laws of which it is our present pur- 
pose to explain, take his stand. Accordingly, recurring 
to the twofold desire of guarding the remains of the 
deceased and preserving their memory, it may be said 
that a sepulchral monument is a tribute to a man as 
a human being ; and that an epitaph (in the ordinary 
meaning attached to the word) includes this general 
feeling and something more ; and is a record to preserve 
the memory of the dead, as a tribute due to his indi- 
vidual worth, for a satisfaction to the sorrowing hearts 

NOTES. 

 

of the survivors, and for the common benefit of the living : 
which record is to be accomplished, not in a general 
manner, hut, where it can, in close connection with the 
bodily remains of the deceased : and these, it may be added, 
among the modern nations of Europe, are deposited 
within, or contiguous to, their places of worship. In 
ancient times, as is well known, it was the custom to 
bury the dead beyond the walls of towns and cities ; and 
among the Greeks and Romans they were frequently 
interred by the way-sides. 
I could here pause with pleasure, and invite the 
Reader to indulge with me in contemplation of the 
advantages which must have attended such a practice. 
We might ruminate upon the beauty which the monu- 
ments, thus placed, must have borrowed from the sur- 
rounding images of nature — from the trees, the wild 
flowers, from a stream running perhaps within sight or 
hearing, from the beaten road stretching its weary length 
hard by. Many tender similitudes must these objects 
have presented to the mind of the traveller leaning 
upon one of the tombs, or reposing in the coolness of 
its shade, whether he had halted from weariness or in 
compliance with the invitation, ' Pause, Traveller ! ' 
so often found upon the monuments. And to its epitaph 
also must have been supplied strong appeals to visible 
appearances or immediate impressions, lively and affect- 
ing analogies of life as a journey — death as a sleep 
overcoming the tired wayfarer — of misfortune as a storm 
that falls suddenly upon him — of beauty as a flower 
that passeth away, or of innocent pleasure as one that 
may be gathered — of virtue that standeth firm as a rock 
against the beating waves ; — of hope ' undermined insen- 
sibly like the poplar by the side of the river that has 
fed it,' or blasted in a moment like a pine-tree by the 
stroke of lightning upon the mountain-top — of admo- 
nitions and heart-stirring remembrances, like a refresh- 
ing breeze that comes without warning, or the taste of 
the waters of an unexpected fountain. These, and 
similar suggestions, must have given, formerly, to the 
language of the senseless stone a voice enforced and 
endeared by the benignity of that nature with which it 
was in unison. — We, in modern times, have lost much 
of these advantages ; and they are but in a small degree 
counterbalanced to the inhabitants of large towns and 
cities, by the custom of depositing the dead within, or 
contiguous to, their places of worship ; however splendid 
or imposing may be the appearance of those edifices, or 
however interesting or salutary the recollections asso- 
ciated with them. Even were it not true that tombs lose 
their monitory virtue when thus obtruded upon the notice 
of men occupied with the cares of the world, and too often 
sullied and defiled by those cares, yet still, when death 
is in our thoughts, nothing can make amends for the 
want of the soothing influences of nature, and for the 
absence of those types of renovation and decay, which 
the fields and woods offer to the notice of the serious 
and contemplative mind. To feel the force of this 
sentiment, let a man only compare in imagination the 
unsightly manner in which our monuments are crowded 
together in the busy, noisy, unclean, and almost grass- 
less church-yard of a large town, with the still seclu- 
sion of a Turkish cemetery, in some remote place ; and 
yet further sanctified by the grove of cypress in which 
it is embosomed. Thoughts in the same temper as these 
have already been expressed with true sensibility by an 
ingenuous Poet of the present day. The subject of his 
poem is " All Saints Church, Derby :" he has been 
deploring the forbidding and unseemly appearance of its 
burial-ground, and uttering a wish, that in past times 
the practice had been adopted of interring the inhabi- 
tants of large towns in the country. — 
■ Then in some rural, calm, sequestered spot, 
Where healing Nature her benignant look 
Ne'er changes, save at that lorn season, when, 

With tresses drooping o'er her sable stole, 
She yearly mourns the mortal doom of man, 
Her noblest work, (so Israel's virgins erst, 
With annual moan upon the mountains wept 
Their fairest gone,) there in that rural scene, 
So placid, so congenial to the wish 
The Christian feels, of peaceful rest within 
The silent grave, I would have stayed : 
 s « « 
—wandered forth, where the cold dew of heaven 
Lay on the humbler graves around, what time 
The pale moon gazed upon the turfy mounds, 
Pensive, as though like me, in lonely muse, 
'Twere brooding on the dead inhumed beneath. 
There while with him, the holy man of Uz, 
O'er human destiny I sympathised, 
Counting the long, long periods prophecy 
Decrees to roll, ere the great day arrives 
Of resurrection, oft the blue-eyed Spring 
Had met me with her blossoms, as the Dove, 
Of old, returned with olive leaf, to cheer 
The Patriarch mourning o'er a world destroyed : 
And I would bless her visit ; for to me 
'Tis sweet to trace the consonance that links 
As one, the works of Nature and the word 
Of God.' 
John Edwards. 
A village church-yard, lying as it does in the lap of 
nature, may indeed be most favourably contrasted with 
that of a town of crowded population ; and sepulture 
therein combines many of the best tendencies which 
belong to the mode practised by the Ancients, with 
others peculiar to itself. The sensations of pious cheer- 
fulness, which attend the celebration of the sabbath- 
day in rural places, are profitably chastised by the sight 
of the graves of kindred and friends, gathered together 
in that general home towards which the thoughtful yet 
happy spectators themselves are journeying. Hence a 
parish-church, in the stillness of the country, is a visible 
centre of a community of the living and the dead ; a 
point to which are habitually referred the nearest con- 
cerns of both. 
As, then, both in cities and in villages, the dead are 
deposited in close connection with our places of worship, 
with us the composition of an epitaph naturally turns, 
still more than among the nations of antiquity, upon the 
most serious and solemn affections of the human mind ; 
upon departed worth — upon personal or social sorrow 
and admiration — upon religion, individual and social — 
upon time, and upon eternity. Accordingly, it suffices, 
in ordinary cases, to secure a composition of this kind 
from censure, that it contain nothing that shall shock 
or be inconsistent with this spirit. But, to entitle an 
epitaph to praise, more than this is necessary. It ought 
to contain some thought or feeling belonging to the 
mortal or immortal part of our nature touchingly ex- 
pressed ; and if that be done, however general or even 
trite the sentiment may be, every man of pure mind will 
read the words with pleasure and gratitude. A husband 
bewails a wife ; a parent breathes a sigh of disappointed 
hope over a lost child ; a son utters a sentiment of filial 
reverence for a departed father or mother ; a friend 
perhaps inscribes an encomium recording the companion- 
able qualities, or the solid virtues, of the tenant of the 
grave, whose departure has left a sadness upon his 
memory. This and a pious admonition to the living, 
and a humble expression of Christian confidence in im- 
mortality, is the language of a thousand church-yards ; 
and it does not often happen that anything, in a greater 
degree discriminate or appropriate to the dead or to the 
living, is to be found in them. This want of discrimina. 
tion has been ascribed by Dr. Johnson, in his Essay upon 
the epitaphs of Pope, to two causes ; first, the scantiness 
of the objects of human praise ; and, secondly, the want 

of variety in the characters of men ; or, to use his own 
words, to the fact, that the greater part of mankind 
have no character at all.' Such language may he holden 
without blame among the generalities of common con- 
versation ; hut does not become a critic and a moralist 
speaking seriously upon a serious subject. The objects 
of admiration in human-nature are not scanty, but 
abundant : and every man has a character of his own, 
to the eye that has skill to perceive it. The real cause 
of the acknowledged want of discrimination in sepulchral 
memorials is this : Thattoanalysethecharactersofothers, 
especially of those whom we love, is not a common or 
natural employment of men at any time. We are not 
anxious unerringly to understand the constitution of the 
minds of those who have soothed, who have cheered, who 
have supported us : with whom we have been long and 
daily pleased or delighted. The affections are their own 
justification. The light of love in our hearts is a satis- 
factory evidence that there is a body of worth in the 
minds of our friends or kindred, whence that light has 
proceeded. "We shrink from the thought of placing their 
merits and defects to be weighed against each other in 
the nice balance of pure intellect ; nor do we find much 
temptation to detect the shades by which a good quality 
or virtue is discriminated in them from an excellence 
known by the same general name as it exists in the 
mind of another ; and, least of all, do we incline to these 
refinements when under the pressure of sorrow, admira- 
tion, or regret, or when actuated by any of those feelings 
which incite men to prolong the memory of their friends 
and kindred, by records placed in the bosom of the all- 
uniting and equalising receptacle of the dead. 
The first requisite, then, in an Epitaph is, that it 
should speak, in a tone which shall sink into the heart, 
the general language of humanity as connected with the 
subject of death — the» source from which an epitaph 
proceeds — of death, and of life. To be born and to die 
are the two points in which all men feel themselves to 
be in absolute coincidence. This general language may 
be uttered so strikingly as to entitle an epitaph to high 
praise ; yet it cannot lay claim to the highest unless 
other excellencies be superadded. Passing through all 
intermediate steps, we will attempt to determine at once 
what these excellencies are, and wherein consists the 
perfection of this species of composition. — It will be 
found to lie in a due proportion of the common or 
universal feeling of humanity to sensations excited by a 
distinct and clear conception, conveyed to the reader's 
mind, of the individual, whose death is deplored and 
whose memory is to be preserved ; at least of his cha- 
racter as, after death, it appeared to those who loved him 
and lament his loss. The general sympathy ought to 
be quickened, provoked, and diversified, by particular 
thoughts, actions, images, — circumstances of age, occu- 
pation, manner of life, prosperity which the deceased 
had known, or adversity to which he had been subject; 
and these ought to be bound together and solemnised 
into one harmony by the general sympathy. The two 
powers should temper, restrain, and exalt each other. 
The reader ought to know who and what the man was 
whom he is called upon to think of with interest. A 
distinct conception should be given (implicitly where it 
can, rather than explicitly) of the individual lamented.— 
But the writer of an epitaph is not an anatomist, who 
dissects the internal frame of the mind ; he is not even a 
painter, who executes a portrait at leisure and in entire 
tranquillity : his delineation, wo must remember, is per- 
formed by the side of the grave ; and, what is more, the 
grave of one whom he loves and admires. What purity 
and brightness is that virtue clothed in, the image of 
which must no longer bless our living eyes ! The cha- 
racter of a deceased friend or beloved kinsman is not 
seen, no— nor ought to be seen, otherwise than as a tree 
through a tender haze or a luminous mist, that spi- 
ritualises and beautifies it ; that takes away, indeed, but 

only to the end that the parts which are not abstracted 
may appear more dignified and lovely ; may impress and 
affect the more. Shall we say, then, that this is not truth, 
not a faithful image ; and that, accordingly, the purposes 
of commemoration cannot be answered ? — It is truth, 
and of the highest order ; for, though doubtless things 
are not apparent which did exist ; yet, the object being 
looked at through this medium, parts and proportions 
are brought into distinct view which before had been 
only imperfectly or unconsciously seen : it is truth 
hallowed by love — the joint offspring of the worth of the 
dead and the affections of the living ! This may easily 
be brought to the test. Let one, whose eyes have been 
sharpened by personal hostility to discover what was 
amiss in the character of a good man, hear the tidings 
of his death, and what a change is wrought in a mo- 
ment ! Enmity melts away ; and, as it disappears, 
unsightliness, disproportion, and deformity, vanish ; and, 
through the influence of commiseration, a harmony of 
love and beauty succeeds. Bring such a man to the 
tombstone on which shall be inscribed an epitaph on his 
adversary, composed in the spirit which we have recom- 
mended. Would he turn from it as from an idle tale ? 
No ; — the thoughtful look, the sigh, and perhaps the 
involuntary tear, would testify that it had a sane, a 
generous, and good meaning ; and that on the writer's 
mind had remained an impression which was a true 
abstract of the character of the deceased ; that his gifts 
and graces were remembered in the simplicity in which 
they ought to be remembered. The composition and 
quality of the mind of a virtuous man, contemplated by 
the side of the grave where his body is mouldering, 
ought to appear, and be felt as something midway 
between what he was on earth walking about with his 
living frailties, and what he may be presumed to be as a 
Spirit in heaven. 
It suffices, therefore, that the trunk and the main 
branches of the worth of the deceased be boldly and un- 
affectedly represented. Any further detail, minutely and 
scrupulously pursued, especially if this be done with 
laborious and antithetic discriminations, must inevitably 
frustrate its own purpose ; forcing the passing Spectator 
to this conclusion, — either that the dead did not possess 
the merits ascribed to him, or that they who have raised 
a monument to his memory, and must therefore be sup- 
posed to have been closely connected with him, were in- 
capable of perceiving those merits ; or at least during 
the act of composition had lost sight of them ; for, the 
understanding having been so busy in its petty occupa- 
tion, how could the heart of the mourner be other than 
cold ? and in either of these cases, whether the fault he 
on the part of the buried person or the survivors, the 
memorial is unaflfecting and profitless. 
Much better is it to fall short in discrimination than 
to pursue it too far, or to labour it unfeelingly. For in 
no place are we so much disposed to dwell upon those 
points, of nature and condition, wherein all men re- 
semble each other, as in the temple where the universal 
Father is worshipped, or by the side of the grave which 
gathers all human Beings to itself, and ' equalises the 
lofty and the low.' We suffer and we weep with the 
same heart ; we love and are anxious for one another in 
one spirit ; our hopes look to the same quarter ; and the 
virtues by which we are all to be furthered and sup- 
ported, as patience, meekness, good-will, justice, tem- 
perance, and temperate desires, are in an equal degree 
the concern of us all. Let an Epitaph, then, contain at 
least these acknowledgments to our common nature ; 
nor let the sense of their importance be sacrificed to a 
balance of opposite qualities or minute distinctions in 
individual character ; which if they do not, (as will for 
the most part be the case,) when examined, resolve them- 
selves into a trick of words, will, even when they are 
true and just, for the most part be grievously out of 
place ; for, as it is probable that few only have explored 

NOTES. 

 

these intricacies of human nature, so can the tracing  
them he interesting only to a few. But an epitaph is not 
a proud writing shut up for the studious : it is exposed 
to all — to the wise and the most ignorant ; it is conde- 
scending, perspicuous, and lovingly solicits regard ; its 
story and admonitions are brief, that the thoughtless, 
the busy, and indolent, may not be deterred, nor the 
impatient tired : the stooping old man cons the engraven 
record like a second horn-book ; — the child is proud that 
he can read it ; — and the stranger is introduced through 
its mediation to the company of a friend : it is concern- 
ing all, and for all : — in the church-yard it is open to the 
day ; the sun looks down upon the stone, and the rains 
of heaven beat against it. 
Yet, though the writer who would excite sympathy is 
bound in this case, more than in any other, to give proof 
that he himself has been moved, it is to be remembered, 
that to raise a monument is a sober and a reflective act ; 
that the inscription which it bears is intended to be per- 
manent, and for universal perusal; and that, for this 
reason, the thoughts and feelings expressed should be 
permanent also — liberated from that weakness and 
anguish of sorrow which is in nature transitory, and 
which with instinctive decency retires from notice. The 
passions should be subdued, the emotions controlled ; 
strong, indeed, but nothing ungovernable or wholly in- 
voluntary. Seemliness requires this, and truth requires 
it also : for how can the narrator otherwise be trusted ? 
Moreover, a grave is a tranquillising object : resignation 
in course of time springs up from it as naturally as the 
wild flowers, besprinkling the turf with which it may be 
covered, or gathering round the monument by which it 
is defended. The very form and substance of the monu- 
ment which has received the inscription, and the appear- 
ance of the letters, testifying with what a slow and 
laborious hand they must have been engraven, might 
seem to reproach the author who had given way upon 
this occasion to transports of mind, or to quick turns of 
conflicting passion ; though the same might constitute 
the life and beauty of a funeral oration or elegiac poem. 
These sensations and judgments, acted upon perhaps 
unconsciously, have been one of the main causes why 
epitaphs so often personate the deceased, and represent 
him as speaking from his own tomb-stone. The de- 
parted Mortal is introduced telling you himself that his 
pains are gone ; that a state of rest is come ; and he 
conjures you to weep for him no longer. He admonishes 
with the voice of one experienced in the vanity of those 
affections which are confined to earthly objects, and 
gives a verdict like a superior Being, performing the 
office of a judge, who has no temptations to mislead him, 
and whose decision cannot but be dispassionate. Thus 
is death disarmed of its sting, and affliction unsubstan- 
tialised. By this tender fiction, the survivors bind them- 
selves to a sedater sorrow, and employ the intervention 
of the imagination in order that the reason may speak 
her own language earlier than she would otherwise have 
been enabled to do. This shadowy interposition also 
harmoniously unites the two worlds of the living and the 
dead by their appropriate affections. And it may be 
observed, that here we have an additional proof of the 
propriety with which sepulchral inscriptions were re- 
ferred to the consciousness of immortality as their primal 
source. 
I do not speak with a wish to recommend that an epi- 
taph should be cast in this mould preferably to the still 
more common one, in which what is said comes from the 
survivors directly ; but rather to point out how natural 
those feelings are which have induced men, in all states 
and ranks of society, so frequently to adopt this mode. 
And this I have done chiefly in order that the laws, 
which ought to govern the composition of the other, 
may be better understood. This latter mode, namely, 
lhat in which the survivors speak in their own persons, 
seems to me upon the whole greatly preferable : as it 

admits a wider range of notices ; and, above all, because, 
excluding the fiction which is the groundwork of the 
other, it rests upon a more solid basis. 
Enough has been said to convey our notion of a perfect 
epitaph ; but it must be borne in mind that one is meant 
which will best answer the general ends of that species of 
composition. According to the course pointed out, the 
worth of private life, through all varieties of situation 
and character, will be most honourably and profitably 
preserved in memory. Nor would the model recom- 
mended less suit public men, in all instances save of 
those persons who by the greatness of their services in 
the employments of peace or war, or by the surpassing ex- 
cellence of their works in art, literature, or science, have 
made themselves not only universally known, but have 
filled the heart of their country with everlasting gratitude. 
Yetlmusthere pause to correct myself. In describing the 
general tenour of thought which epitaphs ought to hold, 
I have omitted to say, that if it be the actions of a man, 
or even some one conspicuous or beneficial act of local or 
general utility, which have distinguished him, and ex- 
cited a desire that he should be remembered, then, of 
course, ought the attention to be directed chiefly to those 
actions or that act : and such sentiments dwelt upon as 
naturally arise out of them or it. Having made this 
necessary distinction, I proceed. — The mighty bene- 
factors of mankind, as they are not only known by the 
immediate survivors, but will continue to be known 
familiarly to latest posterity, do not stand in need of 
biographic sketches, in such a place ; nor of delineations 
of character to individualise them. This is already done 
by their Works, in the memories of men. Their naked 
names, and a grand comprehensive sentiment of civic 
gratitude, patriotic love, or human admiration — or the 
utterance of some elementary principle most essential 
in the constitution of true virtue ; — or a declaration 
touching that pious humility and self-abasement, which 
are ever most profound as minds are most susceptible of 
genuine exaltation — or an intuition, communicated in 
adequate words, of the sublimity of intellectual power ; 
— these are the only tribute which can here be paid — the 
only offering that upon such an altar would not be un- 
worthy. 
' What needs my Shakspeare for his honoured bones 
The labour of an age in piled stones, 
Or that his hallowed reliques should be hid 
Under a star-ypointing pyramid ? 
Dear Son of Memory, great Heir of Fame, 
What need'st thou such weak witness of thy name  
Thou in our wonder and astonishment 
Hast built thyself a livelong monument, 
And so sepulchred, in such pomp dost lie, 
That kings for such a tomb would wish to die.' 

Page . 
'And spires whose ' silent finger points to Heaven.' ' 
An instinctive taste teaches men to build their churches 
in flat countries with spire-steeples, which as they cannot 
be referred to any other object, point as with silent 
finger to the sky and stars, and sometimes, when they 
reflect the brazen light of a rich though rainy sunset, 
appear like a pyramid of flame burning heaven-ward. 
See " The Friend," by S. T. Coleridge, No. , p. . 

Page . 
' TJiat Sycamore, which annually holds 
Within its shade as in a stately tent.' 
' This Sycamore oft musical with Bees ; 
Such Tents the Patriarchs loved.' 
. T. Coleridge. 

 

NOTES. 

Page . 
'Perish the roses and the flowers of Kings.' 
The ' Transit gloria mundi ' is finely expressed in the 
Introduction to the Foundation-charters of some of the 
ancient Ahbeys. Some expressions here used are taken 
from that of the Abbey of St. Mary's, Furness, the trans- 
lation of which is as follows : — 
' Considering every day the uncertainty of life, that 
the roses and flowers of Kings, Emperors, and Dukes, 
and the crowns and palms of all the great, wither and 
decay ; and that all things, with an uninterrupted course, 
tend to dissolution and death : I therefore,' <fcc. 
Page . 
' Earth has lent 

Her waters, Air her breezes.' 
In treating this subject, it was impossible not to recol- 
lect, with gratitude, the pleasing picture, which, in his 

Poem of the Fleece, the excellent and amiable Dyer has 
given of the influences of manufacturing industry upon 
the face of this Island. He wrote at a time when 
machinery was first beginning to be introduced, and his 
benevolent heart prompted him to augur from it nothing 
but good. Truth has compelled me to dwell upon the 
baneful effects arising out of an ill-regulated and exces- 
sive application of powers so admirable in themselves. 

Page . 
'Binding herself by Statute.' 
The discovery ot Dr. Bell affords marvellous facilities 
for carrying this into effect ; and it is impossible to over- 
rate the benefit which might accrue to humanity from 
the universal application of this simple engine under an 
enlightened and conscientious government. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, 

ETC. ETC. 

Mitch the greatest part of the foregoing Poems has been so long before the Public that no 
prefatory matter, explanatory of any portion of them, or of the arrangement which has been adopted, 
appears to be required; and had it not been for the observations contained in those Prefaces upon 
the principles of Poetry in general they would not have been reprinted even as an Appendix in 
this Edition. 

PREFACE 

TO THE SECOND EDITION OF SEVERAL OF THE FOREGOING POEMS, PUBLISHED, WITH AN ADDITIONAL 
VOLUME, UNDER THE TITLE OF " LYRICAL BALLADS." 

[Note.— In succeeding Editions, when the Collection was much enlarged and diversified, this Preface was trans- 
ferred to the end of the Volumes as having little of a special application to their contents.] 

The first Volume of these Poems has already 
been submitted to general perusal. It was published, 
as an experiment, which, I hoped, might be of some 
use to ascertain, how far, by fitting to metrical 
arrangement a selection of the real language of 
men in a state of vivid sensation, that sort of plea- 
sure and that quantity of pleasure may be imparted, 
which a Poet may rationally endeavour to impart. 
I had formed no very inaccurate estimate of the 
probable effect of those Poems : I flattered myself 
that they who should be pleased with them would 
read them with more than common pleasure : and, 
on the other hand, I was well aware, that by those 
who should dislike them, they would be read with 
more than common dislike. The result has differed 
from my expectation in this only, that a greater 
number have been pleased than I ventured to hope 
I should please. 
 
Several of my Friends are anxious for the success 
of these Poems, from a belief, that, if the views 
with which they were composed were indeed 
realised, a class of Poetry would be produced, well 
adapted to interest mankind permanently, and not 
unimportant in the quality, and in the multiplicity 

of its moral relations: and on this account they 
have advised me to prefix a systematic defence of 
the theory upon which the Poems were written. 
But I was unwilling to undertake the task, knowing 
that on this occasion the Reader would look coldly 
upon my arguments, since I might be suspected of 
having been principally influenced by the selfish 
and foolish hope of reasoning him into an appro- 
bation of these particular Poems : and I was still 
more unwilling to undertake the task, because, 
adequately to display the opinions, and fully to 
enforce the arguments, would require a space 
wholly disproportionate to a preface. For, to treat 
the subject with the clearness and coherence of 
which it is susceptible, it would be necessary to 
give a full account of the present state of the public 
taste in this country, and to determine how far 
this taste is healthy or depraved; which, again, 
could not be determined, without pointing out in 
what manner language and the human mind act 
and re-act on each other, and without retracing the 
revolutions, not of literature alone, but likewise of 
society itself. I have therefore altogether declined 
to enter regularly upon this defence ; yet I am sen- 
sible, that there would be something like impro- 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

priety in abruptly obtruding upon the Public, without 
a few words of introduction, Poems so materially 
different from those upon which general approbation 
is at present bestowed. 
It is supposed, that by the act of writing in verse 
an Author makes a formal engagement that he will 
gratify certain known habits of association ; that 
he not only thus apprises the Reader that certain 
classes of ideas and expressions will be found in 
his book, but that others will be carefully excluded. 
This exponent or symbol held forth by metrical 
language must in different eras of literature have 
excited very different expectations : for example, 
in the age of Catullus, Terence, and Lucretius, and 
that of Statius or Claudian ; and in our own country, 
in the age of Shakspeare and Beaumont and 
Fletcher, and that of Donne and Cowley, or Dryden, 
or Pope. I will not take upon me to determine 
the exact import of the promise which, by the act 
of writing in verse, an Author, in the present day 
makes to his reader : but it will undoubtedly appear 
to many persons that I have not fulfilled the terms 
of an engagement thus voluntarily contracted. 
They who have been accustomed to the gaudiness 
and inane phraseology of many modern writers, if 
they persist in reading this book to its conclusion, 
will, no doubt, frequently have to struggle with 
feelings of strangeness and awkwardness : they 
will look round for poetry, and will be induced to 
inquire by what species of courtesy these attempts 
can be permitted to assume that title. I hope 
therefore the reader will not censure me for 
attempting to state what I have proposed to myself 
to perform ; and also (as far as the limits of a 
preface will permit) to explain some of the chief 
reasons which have determined me in the choice of 
my purpose : that at least he may be spared any 
unpleasant feeling of disappointment, and that I 
myself may be protected from one of the most 
dishonourable accusations which can be brought 
against an Author ; namely, that of an indolence 
which prevents him from endeavouring to ascertain 
what is his duty, or, when his duty is ascertained, 
prevents him from performing it. 
The principal object, then, proposed in these 
Poems was to choose incidents and situations from 
common life, and to i-elateor describe them, through- 
out, as far as was possible in a selection of language 
really used by men, and, at the same time, to throw 
over them a certain colouring of imagination, 
whereby ordinary things should be presented to 
the mind in an unusual aspect ; and, further, and 
above all, to make these incidents and situations 
interesting by tracing in them, truly though not 

ostentatiously, the primary laws of our nature: 
chiefly, as far as regards the manner in which we 
associate ideas in a state of excitement. Humble 
and rustic life was generally chosen, because, in 
that condition, the essential passions of the heart 
find a better soil in which they can attain their 
maturity, are less under restraint, and speak a 
plainer and more emphatic language; because in 
that condition of life our elementary feelings co- 
exist in a state of greater simplicity, and, con- 
sequently, may be more accurately contemplated, 
and more forcibly communicated ; because the 
manners of rural life germinate from those ele- 
mentary feelings, and, from the necessary character 
of rural occupations, are more easily comprehended, 
and are more durable ; and, lastly, because in that 
condition the passions of men are incorporated 
with the beautiful and permanent forms of nature. 
The language, too, of these men has been adopted 
(purified indeed from what appear to be its real 
defects, from all lasting and rational causes of 
dislike or disgust) because such men hourly com- 
municate with the best objects from which the best 
part of language is originally derived ; and because, 
from their rank in society and the sameness and 
narrow circle of their intercourse, being less under 
the influence of social vanity, they convey their 
feelings and notions in simple and unelaborated 
expressions. Accordingly, such a language, arising 
out of repeated experience and regular feelings, is 
a more permanent, and a far more philosophical 
language, than that which is frequently substituted 
for it by Poets, who think that they are conferring 
honour upon themselves and their art, in proportion 
as they separate themselves from the sympathies 
of men, and indulge in arbitrary and capricious 
habits of expression, in order to furnish food for 
fickle tastes, and fickle appetites, of their own 
creation . 
I cannot, however, be insensible to the present 
outcry against the triviality and meanness, both of 
thought and language, which some of my con- 
temporaries have occasionally introduced into their 
metrical compositions; and I acknowledge that 
this defect, where it exists, is more dishonourable 
to the Writer's own character than false refine- 
ment or arbitrary innovation, though I should 
contend at the same time, that it is far less 
pernicious in the sum of its consequences. From 
such verses the Poems in these volumes will be 

 It is worth while here to observe, that the affecting 
parts of Chaucer are almost always expressed in language 
pure and universally intelligible even to this day. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

found distinguished at least by one mark of differ- 
ence, that each of them has a worthy purpose. 
Not that I always began to write with a distinct 
purpose formally conceived ; but habits of medi- 
tation have, I trust, so prompted and regulated my 
feelings, that my descriptions of such objects as 
strongly excite those feelings, will be found to carry 
along with them a purpose. If this opinion be 
erroneous, I can have little right to the name of a 
Poet. For all good poetry is the spontaneous 
overflow of powerful feelings : and though this be 
true, Poems to which any value can be attached 
were never produced on any variety of subjects 
but by a man who, being possessed of more than 
usual organic sensibility, had also thought long and 
deeply. For our continued influxes of feeling are 
modified and directed by our thoughts, which are 
indeed the representatives of all our past feelings ; 
and, as by contemplating the relation of these 
general representatives to each other, we discover 
what is really important to men, so, by the repeti- 
tion and continuance of this act, our feelings will 
be connected with important subjects, till at length, 
if we be originally possessed of much sensibility, 
such habits of mind will be produced, that, by 
obeying blindly and mechanically the impulses of 
those habits, we shall describe objects, and utter 
sentiments, of such a nature, and in such connection 
with each other, that the understanding of the 
Reader must necessarily be in some degree en- 
lightened, and his affections strengthened and 
purified. 
It has been said that each of these poems has a 
purpose. Another circumstance must be mentioned 
which distinguishes these Poems from the popular 
Poetry of the day ; it is this, that the feeling there- 
in developed gives importance to the action and 
situation, and not the action and situation to the 
feeling. 
A sense of false modesty shall not prevent me 
from asserting, that the Reader's attention is 
pointed to this mark of distinction, far less for the 
sake of these particular Poems than from the general 
importance of the subject. The subject is indeed 
important ! For the human mind is capable of 
being excited without the application of gross and 
violent stimulants ; and he must have a very faint 
perception of its beauty and dignity who does not 
know this, and who does not further know, that 
one being is elevated above another, in proportion 
as he possesses this capability. It has therefore 
appeared to me, that to endeavour to produce or 
enlarge this capability is one of the best services in 
which, at any period, a Writer can be engaged ; 

but this service, excellent at all times, is especially 
so at the present day. For a multitude of causes, 
unknown to former times, are now acting with a 
combined force to blunt the discriminating powers 
of the mind, and, unfitting it for all voluntary 
exertion, to reduce it to a state of almost savage 
torpor. The most effective of these causes are the 
great national events which are daily taking place, 
and the increasing accumulation of men in cities, 
where the uniformity of their occupations produces 
a craving for extraordinary incident, which the 
rapid communication of intelligence hourly gratifies. 
To this tendency of life and manners the literature 
and theatrical exhibitions of the country have 
conformed themselves. The invaluable works of 
our elder writers, I had almost said the works of 
Shakspeare and Milton, are driven into neglect by 
frantic novels, sickly and stupid German Tragedies 
and deluges of idle and extravagant stories in 
verse. — When I think upon this degrading thirst 
after outrageous stimulation, I am almost ashamed 
to have spoken of the feeble endeavour made in 
these volumes to counteract it; and, reflecting 
upon the magnitude of the general evil, I should be 
oppressed with no dishonourable melancholy, had 
I not a deep impression of certain inherent and 
indestructible qualities of the human mind, and 
likewise of certain powers in the great and 
permanent objects that act upon it, which are 
equally inherent and indestructible ; and were 
there not added to this impression a belief, that the 
time is approaching when the evil will be system- 
atically opposed, by men of greater powers, and 
with far more distinguished success. 
Having dwelt thus long on the subjects and aim 
of these Poems, I shall request the Reader's 
permission to apprise him of a few circumstances 
relating to their style, in order, among other reasons, 
that he may not censure me for not having 
performed what I never attempted. The Reader 
will find that personifications of abstract ideas 
rarely occur in these volumes ; and are utterly 
rejected, as an ordinary device to elevate the style, 
and raise it above prose. My purpose was to 
imitate, and, as far as is possible, to adopt the very 
language of men ; and assuredly such personifica- 
tions do not make any natural or regular part of 
that language. They are, indeed, a figure of speech 
occasionally prompted by passion, and I have made 
use of them as such ; but have endeavoured utterly 
to reject them as a mechanical device of style, or 
as a family language which Writers in metre seem 
to lay claim to by prescription. I have wished to 
keep the Reader in the company of flesh and blood, 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

persuaded that by so doing I shall interest him. 
Others who pursue a different track will interest 
him likewise ; I do not interfere with their claim, 
but wish to prefer a claim of my own. There will 
also be found in these volumes little of what is 
usually called poetic diction ; as much pains has 
been taken to avoid it as is ordinarily taken to 
produce it; this has been done for the reason 
already alleged, to bring my language near to the 
language of men ; and further, because the pleasure 
which I have proposed to myself to impart, is of a 
kind very different from that which is supposed by 
many persons to be the proper object of poetry. 
Without being culpably particular, I do not know 
how to give my Reader a more exact notion of 
the style in which it was my wish and intention 
to write, than by informing him that I have at all 
times endeavoured to look steadily at my subject; 
consequently, there is I hope in these Poems little 
falsehood of description, and my ideas are expressed 
in language fitted to their respective importance. 
Something must have been gained by this practice, 
as it is friendly to one property of all good poetry, 
namely, good sense : but it has necessarily cut me 
off from a large portion of phrases and figures of 
speech which from father to son have long been 
regarded as the common inheritance of Poets. I 
have also thought it expedient to restrict myself 
still further, having abstained from the use of many 
expressions, in themselves proper and beautiful, 
but which have been foolishly repeated by bad 
Poets, till such feelings of disgust are connected 
with them as it is scarcely possible by any art of 
association to overpower. 
If in a poem there should be found a series of 
lines, or even a single line, in which the language, 
though naturally arranged, and according to the 
strict laws of metre, does not differ from that of 
prose, there is a numerous class of critics, who, 
when they stumble upon these prosaisms, as they 
call them, imagine that they have made a notable 
discovery, and exult over the Poet as over a man 
ignorant of his own profession. Now these men 
would establish a canon of criticism which the 
Reader will conclude he must utterly reject, if he 
wishes to be pleased with these volumes. And it 
would be a most easy task to prove to him, that 
not only the language of a large portion of every 
good poem, even of the most elevated character, 
must necessarily, except with reference to the 
metre, in no respect differ from that of good prose, 
but likewise that some of the most interesting parts 
of the best poems will be found to be strictly the 
language of prose when prose is well written. The 

truth of this assertion might be demonstrated by 
innumerable passages from almost all the poetical 
writings, even of Milton himself. To illustrate the 
subject in a general manner, I will here adduce a 
short composition of Gray, who was at the head of 
those who, by their reasonings, have attempted to 
widen the space of separation betwixt Prose and 
Metrical composition, and was more than any 
other man curiously elaborate in the structure of 
his own poetic diction. 

' In vain to me the smiling mornings shine, 
And reddening Phoebus lifts his golden fire: 
The birds in vain their amorous descant join, 
Or cheerful fields resume their green attire. 
These ears, alas ! for other notes repine ; 
A different object do these eyes require , 
My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine ; 
And in my breast the imperfect joys expire j 
Yet morning smiles the busy race to cheer, 
And new-born pleasure brings to happier men ; 
The fields to all their wonted tribute bear ; 
To warm their little loves the birds complain. 
I fruitless mourn to him that cannot hear, 
And weep the more because I weep in vain.' 



It will easily be perceived, that the only part of 
this Sonnet which is of any value is the lines printed 
in Italics ; it is equally obvious, that, except in the 
rhyme, and in the use of the single word fruitless' 
for fruitlessly, which is so far a defect, the language 
of these lines does in no respect differ from that of 
prose. 
By the foregoing quotation it has been shown 
that the language of Prose may yet be well 
adapted to Poetry ; and it was previously asserted, 
that a large portion of the language of every 
good poem can in no respect differ from that of 
good Prose. We will go further. It may be 
safely affirmed, that there neither is, nor can be, 
any essential difference between the language of 
prose and metrical composition. We are fond 
of tracing the resemblance between Poetry and 
Painting, and, accordingly, we call them Sisters : 
but where shall we find bonds of connection 
sufficiently strict to typify the affinity betwixt 
metrical and prose composition? They both 
speak by and to the same organs ; the bodies 
in which both of them are clothed may be said 
to be of the same substance, their affections are 
kindred, and almost identical, not necessarily 
differing even in degree ; Poetry sheds no tears 

 I here use the word ' Poetry ' (though against my own 
judgment) as opposed to the word Prose, and synonymous 
with metrical composition. But much confusion has been 
introduced into criticism by this contradistinction of 
Poetry and Prose, instead of the more philosophical ono of 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c 

 

'such as Angels weep,' but natural and human 
tears ; she can boast of no celestial ichor that 
distinguishes hei vital juices from those of prose ; 
the same human blood circulates through the veins 
of them both. 
If it be affirmed that rhyme and metrical 
arrangement of themselves constitute a distinc- 
tion which overturns what has just been said 
on the strict affinity of metrical language with 
that of prose, and paves the way for other arti- 
ficial distinctions which the mind voluntarily 
admits, I answer that the language of such 
Poetry as is here recommended is, as far as is 
possible, a selection of the language really 
spoken by men ; that this selection, wherever it 
is made with true taste and feeling, will of 
itself form a distinction far greater than would 
at first be imagined, and will entirely separate 
the composition from the vulgarity and meanness 
of ordinary life; and, if metre be superadded 
thereto, I believe that a dissimilitude will be 
produced altogether sufficient for the gratification 
of a rational mind. What other distinction 
would we have? Whence is it to come? And 
where is it to exist? Not, surely, where the 
Poet speaks through the mouths of his characters : 
it cannot be necessary here, either for elevation 
of style, or any of its supposed ornaments: for, 
if the Poet's subject be judiciously chosen, it will 
naturally, and upon fit occasion, lead him to 
passions the language of which, if selected truly 
and judiciously, must necessarily be dignified 
and variegated, and alive with metaphors and 
figures. I forbear to speak of an incongruity 
which would shock the intelligent Reader, should 
the Poet interweave any foreign splendour of 
his own with that which the passion naturally 
suggests : it is sufficient to say that such addition 
is unnecessary. And, surely, it is more probable 
that those passages, which with propriety abound 
with metaphors and figures, will have their due 
effect, if, upon other occasions where the passions 
are of a milder character, the style also be subdued 
and temperate. 
But, as the pleasure which I hope to give by 
the Poems now presented to the Reader must 
depend entirely on just notions upon this sub- 
ject, and, as it is in itself of high importance to 
our taste and moral feelings, I cannot content 

Poetry and Matter of Fact, or Science. The only strict 
antithesis to Prose is Metre ; nor is this, in truth, a strict 
antithesis, because lines and passages of metre so naturally 
occur in writing prose, that it would he scarcely possible 
to avoid them, even were it desirable. 

myself with these detached remarks. And if, 
in what I am about to say, it shall appear to 
some that my labour is unnecessary, and that 
I am like a man fighting a battle without enemies, 
such persons may be reminded, that, whatever 
be the language outwardly holden by men, a 
practical faith in the opinions which I am wish- 
ing to establish is almost unknown. If my con- 
clusions are admitted, and carried as far as they 
must be carried if admitted at all, our judgments 
concerning the works of the greatest Poets both 
ancient and modern will be far different from 
what they are at present, both when we praise, 
and when we censure : and our moral feelings 
influencing and influenced by these judgments 
will, I believe, be corrected and purified. 
Taking up the subject, then, upon general 
grounds, let me ask, what is meant by the word 
Poet? What is a Poet? To whom does he 
address himself? And what language is to be 
expected from him? — He is a man speaking to 
men : a man, it is true, endowed with more 
lively sensibility, more enthusiasm and tenderness, 
who has a greater knowledge of human nature, and 
a more comprehensive soul, than are supposed to 
be common among mankind ; a man pleased with 
his own passions and volitions, and who rejoices 
more than other men in the spirit of life that is in 
him ; delighting to contemplate similar volitions 
and passions as manifested in the goings-on of the 
Universe, and habitually impelled to create them 
where he does not find them. To these qualities 
he has added a disposition to be affected more than 
other men by absent things as if they were present ; 
an ability of conjuring up in himself passions, 
which are indeed far from being the same as 
those produced by real events, yet (especially in 
those parts of the general sympathy which are 
pleasing and delightful) do more nearly resemble 
the passions produced by real events, than any 
thing which, from the motions of their own minds 
merely, other men are accustomed to feel in them- 
selves : — whence, and from practice, he has ac- 
quired a greater readiness and power in expressing 
what he thinks and feels, and especially those 
thoughts and feelings which, by his own choice, or 
from the structure of his own mind, arise in him 
without immediate external excitement. 
But whatever portion of this faculty we may 
suppose even the greatest Poet to possess, there 
cannot be a doubt that the language which it will 
suggest to him, must often, in liveliness and truth, 
fall short of that which is uttered by men in real 
life, under the actual pressure of those passions, 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

certain shadows of which the Poet thus produces, 
or feels to be produced, in himself. 
However exalted a notion we would wish to 
cherish of the character of a Poet, it is obvious, 
that while he describes and imitates passions, his 
employment is in some degree mechanical, com- 
pared with the freedom and power of real and sub- 
stantial action and suffering. So that it will be 
the wish of the Poet to bring his feelings near to 
those of the persons whose feelings he describes, 
nay, for short spaces of time, perhaps, to let himself 
slip into an entire delusion, and even confound and 
identify his own feelings with theirs ; modifying 
only the language which is thus suggested to him 
by a consideration that he describes for a particular 
purpose, that of giving pleasure. Here, then, he 
will apply the principle of selection which has been 
already insisted upon. He will depend upon this 
for removing what would otherwise be painful or 
disgusting in the passion ; he will feel that there is 
no necessity to trick out or to elevate nature : and, 
the more industriously he applies this principle, 
the deeper will be his faith that no words, which 
his fancy or imagination can suggest, will be to be 
compared with those which are the emanations of 
reality and truth. 
But it may be said by those who do not object 
to the general spirit of these remarks, that, as it is 
impossible for the Poet to produce upon all occa- 
sions language as exquisitely fitted for the passion 
as that which the real passion itself suggests, it is 
proper that he should consider himself as in the 
situation of a translator, who does not scruple to 
substitute excellencies of another kind for those 
which are unattainable by him ; and endeavours 
occasionally to surpass his original, in order to 
make some amends for the general inferiority to 
which he feels that he must submit. But this 
would be to encourage idleness and unmanly des- 
pair. Further, it is the language of men who 
speak of what they do not understand ; who talk 
of Poetry as of a matter of amusement and idle 
pleasure ; who will converse with us as gravely 
about a taste for Poetry, as they express it, as if it 
were a thing as indifferent as a taste for rope- 
dancing, or Frontiniac or Sherry. Aristotle, I 
have been told, has said, that Poetry is the most 
philosophic of all writing : it is so : its object is 
truth, not individual and local, but general, and 
operative ; not standing upon external testimony, 
but carried alive into the heart by passion ; truth 
which is its own testimony, which gives compe- 
tence and confidence to the tribunal to which it 
appeals, and receives them from the same tribunal. 

Poetry is the image of man and nature. The 
obstacles which stand in the way of the fidelity of 
the Biographer and Historian, and of their conse- 
quent utility, are incalculably greater than those 
which are to be encountered by the Poet who 
comprehends the dignity of his art. The Poet 
writes under one restriction only, namely, the 
necessity of giving immediate pleasure to a human 
Being possessed of that information which may be 
expected from him, not as a lawyer, a physician, a 
mariner, an astronomer, or a natural philosopher, 
but as a Man. Except this one restriction, there 
is no object standing between the Poet and the 
image of things ; between this, and the Biographer 
and Historian, there are a thousand. 
Nor let this necessity of producing immediate 
pleasure be considered as a degradation of the 
Poet's art. It is far otherwise. It is an acknow- 
ledgment of the beauty of the universe, an acknow- 
ledgment the more sincere, because not formal, 
but indirect ; it is a task fight and easy to him who 
looks at the world in the spirit of love : further, it 
is a homage paid to the native and naked dignity 
of man, to the grand elementary principle of 
pleasure, by which he knows, and feels, and lives, 
and moves. We have no sympathy but what is 
propagated by pleasure : I would not be misunder- 
stood ; but wherever we sympathise with pain, it 
will be found that the sympathy is produced and 
carried on by subtle combinations with pleasure. 
We have no knowledge, that is, no general prin- 
ciples drawn from the contemplation of particular 
facts, but what has been built up by pleasure, and 
exists in us by pleasure alone. The Man of 
science, the Chemist and Mathematician, whatever 
difficulties and disgusts they may have had to 
struggle with, know and feel this. However pain- 
ful may be the objects with which the Anatomist's 
knowledge is connected, he feels that his knowledge 
is pleasure ; and where he has no pleasure he has 
no knowledge. What then does the Poet ? He 
considers man and the objects that surround him 
as acting and re-acting upon each other, so as to 
produce an infinite complexity of pain and pleasure ; 
he considers man in his own nature and in his 
ordinary life as contemplating this with a certain 
quantity of immediate knowledge, with certain con- 
victions, intuitions, and deductions, which from 
habit acquire the quality of intuitions ; he considers 
him as looking upon this complex scene of ideas 
and sensations, and finding every where objects 
that immediately excite in him sympathies which, 
from the necessities of his nature, are accompanied 
by an overbalance of enjoyment. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

To this knowledge which all men carry about 
with them, and to these sympathies in which, with- 
out any other discipline than that of our daily life, 
we are fitted to take delight, the Poet principally 
directs his attention. He considers man and nature 
as essentially adapted to each other, and the mind 
of man as naturally the mirror of the fairest and 
most interesting properties of nature. And thus 
the Poet, prompted by this feeling of pleasure, 
which accompanies him through the whole course 
of his studies, converses with general nature, with 
affections akin to those, which, through labour and 
length of time, the Man of science has raised up in 
himself, by conversing with those particular parts 
of nature which are the objects of his studies. The 
knowledge both of the Poet and the Man of science 
is pleasure ; but the knowledge of the one cleaves 
to us as a necessary part of our existence, our 
natural and unalienable inheritance ; the other is a 
personal and individual acquisition, slow to come 
to. us, and by no habitual and direct sympathy 
connecting us with our fellow-beings. The Man of 
science seeks truth as a remote and unknown 
benefactor ; he cherishes and loves it in his soli- 
tude : the Poet, singing a song in which all human 
beings join with him, rejoices in the presence of 
truth as our visible friend and hourly companion. 
Poetry is the breath and finer spirit of all know- 
ledge ; it is the impassioned expression which is 
in the countenance of all Science. Emphatically 
may it be said of the Poet, as Shakspeare hath 
said of man, ' that he looks before and after. ' He 
is the rock of defence for human nature; an 
upholder and preserver, carrying every where 
with him relationship and love. In spite of differ- 
ence of soil and climate, of language and manners, 
of laws and customs: in spite of things silently 
gone out of mind, and things violently destroyed ; 
' the Poet binds together by passion and knowledge 
the vast empire of human society, as it is spread 
over the whole earth, and over all time. The 
objects of the Poet's thoughts are every where; 
though the eyes and senses of man are, it is true, 
his favourite guides, yet he will follow wheresoever 
he can find an atmosphere of sensation in which to 
move his wings. Poetry is the first and last of all 
knowledge — it is as immortal as the heart of man. 
If the labours of Men of science should ever create 
any material revolution, direct or indirect, in our 
condition, and in the impressions which we habit- 
ually receive, the Poet will sleep then no more than 
at present ; he will be ready to follow the steps of 
the Man of science, not only in those general 
indirect effects, but he will be at his side, carrying 

sensation into the midst of the objects of the science 
itself. The remotest discoveries of the Chemist, 
the Botanist, or Mineralogist, will be as proper 
objects of the Poet's art as any upon which it can 
be employed, if the time should ever come when 
these things shall be familiar to us, and the relations 
under which they are contemplated by the followers 
of these respective sciences shall be manifestly and 
palpably material to us as enjoying and suffering 
beings. If the time should ever come when what 
is now called science, thus familiarised to men, 
shall be ready to put on, as it were, a form of flesh 
and blood, the Poet will lend his divine spirit to aid 
the transfiguration, and will welcome the Being thus 
produced, as a dear and genuine inmate of the 
household of man. — It is not, then, to be supposed 
that any one, who holds that sublime notion of 
Poetry which I have attempted to convey, will 
break in upon the sanctity and truth of his pictures 
by transitory and accidental ornaments, and 
endeavour to excite admiration of himself by arts, 
the necessity of which must manifestly depend upon 
the assumed meanness of his subject. 
What has been thus far said applies to Poetry 
.in general ; but especially to those parts of com- 
position where the Poet speaks through the mouths 
of his characters ; and upon this point it appears 
to authorise the conclusion that there are few 
persons of good sense, who would not allow that 
the dramatic parts of composition are defective, in 
proportion as they deviate from the real language 
of nature, and are coloured by a diction of the 
Poet's own, either peculiar to him as an individual 
Poet or belonging simply to Poets in general ; to a 
body of men who, from the circumstance of their 
compositions being in metre, it is expected will 
employ a particular language. 
It is not, then, in the dramatic parts of composi- 
tion that we look for this distinction of language ; 
but still it may be proper and necessary where the 
Poet speaks to us in his own person and character. 
To this I answer by referring the Reader to the 
description before given of a Poet. Among the 
qualities there enumerated as principally conducing 
to form a Poet, is implied nothing differing in kind 
from other men, but only in degree. The sum of 
what was said is, that the Poet is chiefly dis- 
tinguished from other men by a greater promptness 
to think and feel without immediate external 
excitement, and a greater power in expressing 
such thoughts and feelings as are produced in him 
in that manner. But these passions and thoughts 
and feelings are the general passions and thoughts 
and filings of men. And with what are they 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 


connected  Undoubtedly with our moral sentiments 
and animal sensations, and with the causes which 
excite these ; with the operations of the elements, 
and the appearances of the visible universe ; with 
storm and sunshine, with the revolutions of the 
seasons, with cold and heat, with loss of friends 
and kindred, with injuries and resentments, grati- 
tude and hope, with fear and sorrow. These, and 
the like, are the sensations and objects which the 
Poet describes, as they are the sensations of other 
men, and the objects which interest them. The 
Poet thinks and feels in the spirit of human passions. 
How, then, can his language differ in any material 
degree from that of all other men who feel vividly 
and see clearly \ It might be proved that it is im- 
possible. But supposing that this were not the 
case, the Poet might then be allowed to use a 
peculiar language when expressing his feelings for 
his own gratification, or that of men like himself. 
But Poets do not write for Poets alone, but for 
men. Unless therefore we are advocates for that 
admiration which subsists upon ignorance, and that 
pleasure which arises from hearing what we do not 
understand, the Poet must descend from this 
supposed height ; and, in order to excite rational 
sympathy, he must express himself as other men 
express themselves. To this it may be added, that 
while he is only selecting from the real language of 
men, or, which amounts to the same thing, compo- 
sing accurately in the spirit of such selection, he is 
treading upon safe ground, and we know what we 
are to expect from him. Our feelings are the same 
with respect to metre ; for, as it may be proper to 
remind the Reader, the distinction of metre is 
regular and uniform, and not, like that which is 
produced by what is usually called poetic diction, 
arbitrary, and subject to infinite caprices upon 
which no calculation whatever can be made. In 
the one case, the Reader is utterly at the mercy of 
the Poet, respecting what imagery or diction he 
may choose to connect with the passion ; whereas, 
in the other, the metre obeys certain laws, to which 
the Poet and Reader both willingly submit because 
they are certain, and because no interference is 
made by them with the passion but such as the 
concurring testimony of ages has shown to heighten 
and improve the pleasure which co-exists with it. 
It will now be proper to answer an obvious 
question, namely, Why, professing these opinions, 
have I written in verse ? To this, in addition to 
such answer as is included in what has been already 
said, I reply, in the first place, Because, however 
I may have restricted myself, there is still left 
open to me what confessedly constitutes the most 

valuable object of all writing, whether in prose or 
verse ; the great and universal passions of men, 
the most general and interesting of their occupations 
and the entire world of nature before me — to supply 
endless combinations of forms and imagery. Now, 
supposing for a moment that whatever is interest- 
ing in these objects may be as vividly described in 
prose, why should I be condemned for attempting 
to superadd to such description, the charm which, 
by the consent of all nations, is acknowledged to 
exist in metrical language ? To this, by such as 
are yet unconvinced, it may be answered that a 
very small part of the pleasure given by Poetry 
depends upon the metre, and that it is injudicious 
to write in metre, unless it be accompanied with 
the other artificial distinctions of style with which 
metre is usually accompanied, and that, by such 
deviation, more will be lost from the shock which will 
thereby be given to the Reader's associations than 
will be counterbalanced by any pleasure which he 
can derive from the general power of numbers. In 
answer to those who still contend for the necessity 
of accompanying metre with certain appropriate 
colours of style in order to the accomplishment of 
its appropriate end, and who also, in my opinion, 
greatly under-rate the power of metre in itself, it 
might, perhaps, as far as relates to these Volumes, 
have been almost sufficient to observe, that poems 
are extant, written upon more humble subjects, and 
in a still more naked and simple style, which have 
continued to give pleasure from generation to 
generation. Now, if nakedness and simplicity be a 
defect, the fact here mentioned affords a strong 
presumption that poems somewhat less naked and 
simple are capable of affording pleasure at the 
present day ; and, what I wished chiefly to attempt, 
at present, was to justify myself for having written 
under the impression of this belief. 
But various causes might be pointed out why, 
when the style is manly, and the subject of some 
importance, words metrically arranged will long 
continue to impart such a pleasure to mankind as 
he who proves the extent of that pleasure will be 
desirous to impart. The end of Poetry is to pro- 
duce excitement in co-existence with an over- 
balance of pleasure ; but, by the supposition, 
excitement is an unusual and irregular state of 
the mind ; ideas and feelings do not, in that state, 
succeed each other in accustomed order. If the 
words, however, by which this excitement is pro- 
duced be in themselves powerful, or the images 
and feelings have an undue proportion of pain 
connected with them, there is some danger that 
the excitement may be carried beyond its, proper 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

bounds. Now the co-presence of something regu- 
lar, something to which the mind has been accus- 
tomed in various moods and in a less excited state, 
cannot but have great efficacy in tempering and 
restraining the passion by an intertexture of 
ordinary feeling, and of feehng not strictly and 
necessarily connected with the passion. This is 
unquestionably true ; and hence, though the 
opinion will at first appear paradoxical, from the 
tendency of metre to divest language, in a certain 
degree, of its reality, and thus to throw a sort of 
half-consciousness of unsubstantial existence over 
the whole composition, there can be little doubt 
but that more pathetic situations and sentiments, 
that is, those which have a greater proportion of 
pain connected with them, may be endured in 
metrical composition, especially in rhyme, than 
in prose. The metre of the old ballads is very 
artless ; yet they contain many passages which 
would illustrate this opinion ; and, I hope, if the 
following Poems be attentively perused, similar 
instances will be found in them. This opinion 
may be further illustrated by appealing to the 
Reader's own experience of the reluctance with 
which he comes to the re-perusal of the distressful 
parts of Clarissa Harlowe, or the Gamester ; while 
Shakspeare's writings, in the most pathetic scenes, 
never act upon us, as pathetic, beyond the bounds 
of pleasure — an effect which, in a much greater 
degree than might at first be imagined, is to be 
ascribed to small, but continual and regular im- 
pulses of pleasurable surprise from the metrical 
arrangement. — On the other hand (what it must 
be allowed will much more frequently happen) if 
the Poet's words should be incommensurate with 
the passion, and inadequate to raise the Reader 
to a height of desirable excitement, then, (unless 
the Poet's choice of his metre has been grossly 
injudicious) in the feelings of pleasure which the 
Reader has been accustomed to connect with metre 
in general, and in the feeling, whether cheerful 
or melancholy, which he has been accustomed to 
connect with that particular movement of metre, 
there will be found something which will greatly 
contribute to impart passion to the words, and 
to effect the complex end which the Poet proposes 
to himself. 
If I had undertaken a systematic defence of 
the theory here maintained, it would have been 
my duty to develope the various causes upon 
which the pleasure received from metrical language 
depends. Among the chief of these causes is to 
be reckoned a principle which must be well 
known to those who have made any of the Arts 

the object of accurate reflection ; namely, the 
pleasure which the mind derives from the percep- 
tion of similitude in dissimilitude. This principle 
is the great spring of the activity of our minds, 
and their chief feeder. From this principle the 
direction of the sexual appetite, and all the passions 
connected with it, take their origin : it is the life 
of our ordinary conversation; and upon the 
accuracy with which similitude in dissimilitude, 
and dissimilitude in similitude are perceived, 
depend our taste and our moral feelings. It 
would not be a useless employment to apply this 
principle to the consideration of metre, and to 
show that metre is hence enabled to afford much 
pleasure, and to point out in what manner that 
pleasure is produced. But my limits will not 
permit me to enter upon this subject, and I must 
content myself with a general summary. 
I have said that poetry is the spontaneous over- 
flow of powerful feelings : it takes its origin from 
emotiom recollected in tranquillity : the emotion 
is contemplated till, by a species of re-action, the 
tranquillity gradually disappears, and an emotion, 
kindred to that which was before the subject of 
contemplation, is gradually produced, and does 
itself actually exist in the mind. In this mood 
successful composition generally begins, and in a 
mood similar to this it is carried on ; but the emo- 
tion, of whatever kind, and in whatever degree, 
from various causes, is qualified by various 
pleasures, so that in describing any passions what- 
soever, which are voluntarily described, the mind 
will, upon the whole, be in a state of enjoyment. 
If Nature be thus cautious to preserve in a state 
of enjoyment a being so employed, the Poet ought 
to profit by the lesson held forth to him, and ought 
especially to take care, that, whatever passions he 
communicates to his Reader, those passions, if 
his Reader's mind be sound and vigorous, should 
always be accompanied with an overbalance of 
pleasure. Now the music of harmonious metrical 
language, the sense of difficulty overcome, and the 
blind association of pleasure which has been pre- 
viously received from works of rhyme or metre of 
the same or similar construction, an indistinct per- 
ception perpetually renewed of language closely 
resembling that of real life, and yet, in the cir- 
cumstance of metre, differing from it so widely — all 
these imperceptibly make up a complex feeling of 
delight, which is of the most important use in 
tempering the painful feeling always found inter- 
mingled with powerful descriptions of the deeper 
passions. This effect is always produced in pathetic 
and impassioned poetry ; while, in lighter compo- 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

sitions, the ease and gracefulness with which the 
Poet manages his numbers are themselves con- 
fessedly a principal source of the gratification of 
the Reader. All that it is necessary to say, how- 
ever, upon this subject, may be effected by affirm- 
ing, what few persons will deny, that, of two 
descriptions, either of passions, manners, or cha- 
racters, each of them equally well executed, the 
one in prose and the other in verse, the verse will 
be read a hundred times where the prose is read 
once. 
Having thus explained a few of my reasons for 
writing in verse, and why I have chosen subjects 
from common life, and endeavoured to bring my 
language near to the real language of men, if I 
have been too minute in pleading my own cause, I 
have at the same time been treating a subject of 
general interest ; and for this reason a few words 
shall be added with reference solely to these par- 
ticular poems, and to some defects which will pro- 
bably be found hi them. I am sensible that my 
associations must have sometimes been particular 
instead of general, and that, consequently, giving 
to things a false importance, I may have some- 
times written upon unworthy subjects ; but I am 
less apprehensive on this account, than that my 
language may frequently have suffered from those 
arbitrary connections of feelings and ideas with 
particular words and phrases, from which no man 
can altogether protect himself. Hence I have no 
doubt, that, in some instances, feelings, even of the 
ludicrous, may be given to my Readers by ex- 
pressions which appeared to me tender and pathe- 
tic. Such faulty expressions, were I convinced they 
were faulty at present, and that they must neces- 
sarily continue to be so, I would willingly take all 
reasonable pains to correct. But it is dangerous 
to make these alterations on the simple authority 
of a few individuals, or even of certain classes of 
men ; for where the understanding of an Author 
is not convinced, or his feelings altered, this cannot 
be done without great injury to himself: for his 
own feelings are his stay and support ; and, if he 
set them aside in one instance, he may be induced 
to repeat this act till his mind shall lose all con- 
fidence in itself, and become utterly debilitated. 
To this it may be added, that the critic ought 
never to forget that he is himself exposed to the 
same errors as the Poet, and, perhaps, in a much 
greater degree : for there can be no presumption 
in saying of most readers, that it is not probable 
they will be so well acquainted with the various 
stages of meaning through which words have 
passed, or with the fickleness or stability of the 


relations of particular ideas to each other ; and, 
above all, since they are so much less interested in 
the subject, they may decide lightly and carelessly. 
Long as the Reader has been detained, I hope 
he will permit me to caution him against a mode 
of false criticism which has been applied to Poetry, 
in which the language closely resembles that of 
life and nature. Such verses have been triumphed 
over in parodies, of which Dr. Johnson's stanza is 
a fair specimen : — 
' I put my hat upon my head 
And walked into the Strand, 
And there I met another man 
Whose hat was in his hand.' 
Immediately under these lines let us place one 
of the most justly-admired stanzas of the " Bales 
in the Wood." 
' These pretty Babes with hand in hand 
Went wandering up and down ; 
But never more they saw the Man 
Approaching from the Town.' 
In both these stanzas the words, and the order 
of the words, in no respect differ from the most 
unimpassioned conversation. There are words in 
both, for example, ' the Strand,' and ' the Town,' 
connected with none but the most familiar ideas ; 
yet the one stanza we admit as admirable, and the 
other as a fair example of the superlatively con- 
temptible. Whence arises this difference? Not 
from the metre, not from the language, not from 
the order of the words ; but the matter expressed 
in Dr. Johnson's stanza is contemptible. The 
proper method of treating trivial and simple verses, 
to which Dr. Johnson's stanza would be a fair 
parallelism, is not to say, this is a bad kind of 
poetry, or, this is not poetry; but, this wants 
sense ; it is neither interesting in itself, nor can 
lead to any thing interesting ; the images neither 
originate in that sane state of feeling which arises 
out of thought, nor can excite thought or feeling 
in the Reader. This is the only sensible manner 
of dealing with such verses. Why trouble your- 
self about the species till you have previously 
decided upon the genus? Why take pains to 
prove that an ape is not a Newton, when it is 
self-evident that he is not a man ? 
One request I must make of my reader, which 
is, that in judging these Poems he would decide 
by his own feelings genuinely, and not by reflection 
upon what will probably be the judgment of others. 
How common is it to hear a person say, I myself 
do not object to this style of composition, or this 
or that expression, but, to such and such classes of 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

people it will appear mean or ludicrous ! This mode 
of criticism, so destructive of all sound unadulterated 
judgment, is almost universal : let the Reader then 
abide, independently, by his own feelings, and, if 
he finds himself affected, let him not suffer such 
conjectures to interfere with his pleasure. 
If an Author, by any single composition, has im- 
pressed us with respect for his talents, it is useful 
to consider this as affording a presumption, that 
on other occasions where we have been displeased, 
he, nevertheless, may not have written ill or 
absurdly ; and further, to give him so much credit 
for this one composition as may induce us to re- 
view what has displeased us, with more care than 
we should otherwise have bestowed upon it. This 
is not only an act of justice, but, in our decisions 
upon poetry especially, may conduce, in a high 
degree, to the improvement of our own taste: for an 
accurate taste in poetry, and in all the other arts, 
as Sir Joshua Reynolds has observed, is an acquired 
talent, which can only be produced by thought and 
a long-continued intercourse with the best models 
of composition. This is mentioned, not with so 
ridiculous a purpose as to prevent the most inex- 
perienced Reader from judging for himself, (I 
have already said that I wish him to judge 
for himself;) but merely to temper the rashness 
of decision, and to suggest, that, if Poetry be a 
subject on which much time has not been bestowed, 
the judgment may be erroneous ; and that, in 
many cases, it necessarily will be so. 
Nothing would, I know, have so effectually con- 
tributed to further the end which I have in view, 
as to have shown of what kind the pleasure is, and 
how that pleasure is produced, which is confessedly 
produced by metrical composition essentially dif- 
ferent from that which I have here endeavoured 
to recommend : for the Reader will say that he 
has been pleased by such composition ; and what 
more can be done for him? The power of any 
art is limited ; and he will suspect, that, if it be 
proposed to furnish him with new friends, that 

can be only upon condition of his abandoning his 
old friends. Besides, as I have said, the Reader 
is himself conscious of the pleasure which he has 
received from such composition, composition to 
which he has peculiarly attached the endearing 
name of Poetry ; and all men feel an habitual 
gratitude, and something of an honourable bigotry, 
for the objects which have long continued to please 
them : we not only wish to be pleased, but to be 
pleased in that particular way in which we have 
been accustomed to be pleased. There is in these 
feelings enough to resist a host of arguments ; 
and I should be the less able to combat them 
successfully, as I am willing to allow, that, in order 
entirely to enjoy the Poetry which I am recom- 
mending, it would be necessary to give up much 
of what is ordinarily enjoyed. But, would my 
limits have permitted me to point out how this 
pleasure is produced, many obstacles might have 
been removed, and the Reader assisted in per- 
ceiving that the powers of language are not so 
limited as he may suppose ; and that it is possible 
for poetry to give other enjoyments, of a purer, 
more lasting, and more exquisite nature. This 
part of the subj ect has not been altogether neglected, 
but it has not been so much my present aim to 
prove, that the interest excited by some other kinds 
of poetry is less vivid, and less worthy of the nobler 
powers of the mind, as to offer reasons for pre- 
suming, that if my purpose were fulfilled, a species 
of poetry would be produced, which is genuine 
poetry ; in its nature well adapted to interest man- 
kind permanently, and likewise important in the 
multiplicity and quality of its moral relations. 
From what has been said, and from a perusal of 
the Poems, the Reader will be able clearly to per- 
ceive the object which I had in view: he will 
determine how far it has been attained ; and, what 
is a much more important question, whether it be 
worth attaining : and upon the decision of these 
two questions will rest my claim to the approbation 
of the Public. 

u u  

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

APPENDIX. 

See page  — ' by what is usually called Poetic Diction. 

Perhaps, as I have no right to expect that 
attentive perusal, without which, confined, as I 
have been, to the narrow limits of a preface, my 
meaning cannot be thoroughly understood, I am 
anxious to give an exact notion of the sense in 
which the phrase poetic diction has been used ; and 
for this purpose, a few words shall here be added, 
concerning the origin and characteristics of the phra- 
seology, which I have condemned under that name. 
The earliest poets of all nations generally wrote 
from passion excited by real events ; they wrote 
naturally, and as men : feeling powerfully as they 
did, their language was daring, and figurative. In 
succeeding times, Poets, and Men ambitious of the 
fame of Poets, perceiving the influence of such 
language, and desirous of producing the same 
effect without being animated by the same passion, 
set themselves to a mechanical adoption of these 
figures of speech, and made use of them, sometimes 
with propriety, but much more frequently applied 
them to feelings and thoughts with which they had 
no natural connection whatsoever. A language 
was thus insensibly produced, differing materially 
from the real language of men in any situation. 
The Reader or Hearer of this distorted language 
found himself in a perturbed and unusual state of 
mind : when affected by the genuine language of 
passion he had been in a perturbed and unusual 
state of mind also : in both cases he was willing 
that his common judgment and understanding 
should be laid asleep, and he had no instinctive 
and infallible perception of the true to make him 
reject the false : the one served as a passport for 
the other. The emotion was in both cases delight- 
ful, and no wonder if he confounded the one with 
the other, and believed them both to be produced 
by the same, or similar causes. Besides, the Poet 
spake to him in the character of a man to be 
looked up to, a man of genius and authority. Thus, 
and from a variety of other causes, this distorted 
language was received with admiration ; and Poets, 
it is probable, who had before contented themselves 
for the most part with misapplying only expressions 
which at first had been dictated by real passion, 

carried the abuse still further, and introduced 
phrases composed apparently in the spirit of the ori- 
ginal figurative language of passion, yet altogether of 
their own invention, and characterised by various de- 
grees of wanton deviation from good sense and nature. 
It is indeed true, that the language of the 
earliest Poets was felt to differ materially from 
ordinary language, because it was the language of 
extraordinary occasions ; but it was really spoken 
by men, language which the Poet himself had 
uttered when he had been affected by the events 
which he described, or which he had heard uttered 
by those around him. To this language it is pro- 
bable that metre of some sort or other was early 
superadded. This separated the genuine language 
of Poetry still further from common life, so that 
whoever read or heard the poems of these earliest 
Poets felt himself moved in a way in which he had 
not been accustomed to be moved in real life, 
and by causes manifestly different from those 
which acted upon him in real life. This was 
the great temptation to all the corruptions which 
have followed : under the protection of this feel- 
ing succeeding Poets constructed a phraseology 
which had one thing, it is true, in common with 
the genuine language of poetry, namely, that it was 
not heard in ordinary conversation ; that it was 
unusual. But the first Poets, as I have said, spake 
a language which, though unusual, was still the 
language of men. This circumstance, however, 
was disregarded by their successors ; they found 
that they could please by easier means : they be- 
came proud of modes of expression which they 
themselves had invented, and which were uttered 
only by themselves. In process of time metre 
became a symbol or promise of this unusual lan- 
guage, and whoever took upon him to write in 
metre, according as he possessed more or less of 
true poetic genius, introduced less or more of this 
adulterated phraseology into his compositions, 
and the true and the false were inseparably 
interwoven until, the taste of men becoming gra- 
dually perverted, this language was received as 
a natural language: and at length, by the in- 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

fluence of books upon men, did to a certain 
degree really become so. Abuses of this kind 
were imported from one nation to another, and 
with the progress of refinement this diction became 
daily more and more corrupt, thrusting out of 
sight the plain humanities of nature by a motley 
masquerade of tricks, quaintnesses, hieroglyphics, 
and enigmas. 
It would not be uninteresting to point out the 
causes of the pleasure given by this extravagant 
and absurd diction. It depends upon a great 
variety of causes, but upon none, perhaps, more 
than its influence in impressing a notion of the 
peculiarity and exaltation of the Poet's character, 
and in flattering the Reader's self-love by bringing 
him nearer to a sympathy with that character ; an 
effect which is accomplished by unsettling ordinary 
habits of thinking, and thus assisting the Reader 
to approach to that perturbed and dizzy state of 
mind in which if he does not find himself, he ima- 
gines that he is balked of a peculiar enjoyment 
which poetry can and ought to bestow. 
The sonnet quoted from Gray, in the Preface, 
except the lines printed in Italics, consists of little 
else but this diction, though not of the worst kind ; 
and indeed, if one may be permitted to say so, it is 
far too common in the best writers both ancient 
and modern. Perhaps in no way, by positive ex- 
ample, could more easily be given a notion of what 
I mean by the phrase poetic diction than by re- 
ferring to a comparison between the metrical 
paraphrase which we have of passages in the Old 
and New Testament, and those passages as they 
exist in our common Translation. See Pope's 
| Messiah" throughout ; Prior's ' Did sweeter 
sounds adorn my flowing tongue,' &c. &c. ' Though 
I speak with the tongues of men and of angels,' 
&c. &c. st Corinthians, chap. xiii. By way 
of immediate example, take the following of Dr 
Johnson : 
' Turn on the prudent Ant thy heedless eyes, 
Observe her labours, Sluggard, and be wise ; 
No stern command, no monitory voice, 
Prescribes her duties, or directs her choice ; 
Yet, timely provident, she hastes away 
To snatch the blessings of a plenteous day ; 
When fruitful Summer loads the teeming plain, 
She crops the harvest, and she stores the grain. 
How long shall sloth usurp thy useless hours, 
Unnerve thy vigour, and enchain thy powers? 
"While artful shades thy downy couch enclose, 
And soft solicitation courts repose, 
Amidst the drowsy charms of dull delight, 
Year chases year with unremitted flight, 
Till Want now following, fraudulent and slow, 
Shall spring to seize thee, lite an ambush'd foe.' 

From this hubbub of words pass to the original. 
£ Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her ways, 
and be wise : which having no guide, overseer, or 
ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and 
gathereth her food in the harvest. How long 
wilt thou sleep, Sluggard ? when wilt thou arise 
out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little 
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. So 
shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and 
thy want as an armed man.' Proverbs, chap. vi. 
One more quotation, and I have done. It is 
from Cowper's Verses supposed to be written by 
Alexander Selkirk : — 
' Religion ! what treasure untold 
Resides in that heavenly word ! 
More precious than silver and gold, 
Or all that this earth can afford. 
But the sound of the church-going bell 
These valleys and rocks never heard, 
Ne'er sighed at the sound of a knell, 
Or smiled when a sabbath appeared. 
Ye winds, that have made me your sport 
Convey to this desolate shore 
Some cordial endearing report 
Of a land I must visit no more. 
My Friends, do they now and then send 
A wish or a thought after me ? 
O tell me I yet have a friend, 
Though a friend I am never to see.' 
This passage is quoted as an instance of three 
different styles of composition. The first four 
lines are poorly expressed ; some Critics would call 
the language prosaic ; the fact is, it would be bad 
prose, so bad, that it is scarcely worse in metre. 
The epithet e church-going' applied to a bell, and 
that by so chaste a writer as Cowper, is an instance 
of the strange abuses which Poets have introduced 
into their language, till they and their Readers 
take them as matters of course, if they do not 
single them out expressly as objects of admiration. 
The two lines ' Ne'er sighed at the sound,' &c, 
are, in my opinion, an instance of the language of 
passion wrested from its proper use, and, from the 
mere circumstance of the composition being in 
metre, applied upon an occasion that does not 
justify such violent expressions ; and I should 
condemn the passage, though perhaps few Readers 
will agree with me, as vicious poetic diction. The 
last stanza is throughout admirably expressed : it 
would be equally good whether in prose or verse, 
except that the Reader has an exquisite pleasure in 
seeing such natural language so naturally connected 
with metre. The beauty of this stanza tempts me 
to conclude with a principle which ought never to 
be lost sight of, and which has been my chief 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

guide in all I have said, — namely, that in works 
of imagination and sentiment, for of these only 
have I been treating, in proportion as ideas and 
feelings are valuable, whether the composition be 
in prose or in verse, they require and exact one 

and the same language. Metre is but adventitious 
to composition, and the phraseology for which 
that passport is necessary, even where it may be 
graceful at all, will be little valued by the judi- 
cious. 

ESSAY, SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE PREFACE. 

With the young of both sexes, Poetry is, like 
love, a passion ; but, for much the greater part of 
those who have been proud of its power over their 
minds, a necessity soon arises of breaking the 
pleasing bondage; or it relaxes of itself; — the 
thoughts being occupied in domestic cares, or the 
time engrossed by business. Poetry then becomes 
only an occasional recreation ; while to those whose 
existence passes away in a course of fashionable 
pleasure, it is a species of luxurious amusement. 
In middle and declining age, a scattered number 
of serious persons resort to poetry, as to religion, 
for a protection against the pressure of trivial em- 
ployments, and as a consolation for the afflictions 
of life. And, lastly, there are many, who, having 
been enamoured of this art in their youth, have 
found leisure, after youth was spent, to cultivate 
general literature ; in which poetry has continued 
to be comprehended as a study. 
Into the above classes the Readers of poetry 
may be divided ; Critics abound in them all ; but 
from the last only can opinions be collected of 
absolute value, and worthy to be depended upon, 
as prophetic of the destiny of a new work. The 
young, who in nothing can escape delusion, are 
especially subject to it in their intercourse with 
Poetry. The cause, not so obvious as the fact is 
unquestionable, is the same as that from which 
erroneous judgments in this art, in the minds of 
men of all ages, chiefly proceed ; but upon Youth 
it operates with peculiar force. The appropriate 
business of poetry, (which, nevertheless, if genuine, 
is as permanent as pure science,) her appropriate 
employment, her privilege and her duty, is to treat 
of things not as they are, but as they appear; not 
as they exist in themselves, but as they seem to 
exist to the senses, and to the passions. What a 
world of delusion does this acknowledged obligation 
prepare for the inexperienced ! what temptations 
to go astray are here held forth for them whose 
thoughts have been little disciplined by the under- 

standing, and whose feelings revolt from the sway 
of reason ! — When a juvenile Reader is in the 
height of his rapture with some vicious passage, 
should experience throw in doubts, or common- 
sense suggest suspicions, a lurking consciousness 
that the realities of the Muse are but shows, and 
that her liveliest excitements are raised by tran- 
sient shocks of conflicting feeling and successive 
assemblages of contradictory thoughts — is ever at 
hand to justify extravagance, and to sanction 
absurdity. But, it may be asked, as these illusions 
are unavoidable, and, no doubt, eminently useful 
to the mind as a process, what good can be gained 
by making observations, the tendency of which is 
to diminish the confidence of youth in its feelings, 
and thus to abridge its innocent and even profit- 
able pleasures \ The reproach implied in the 
question could not be warded off, if Youth were 
incapable of being delighted with what is truly 
excellent ; or, if these errors always terminated of 
themselves in due season. But, with the majority, 
though their force be abated, they continue through 
life. Moreover, the fire of youth is too vivacious 
an element to be extinguished or damped by a 
philosophical remark ; and, while there is no dan- 
ger that what has been said will be injurious or 
painful to the ardent and the confident, it may 
prove beneficial to those who, being enthusiastic, 
are, at the same time, modest and ingenuous. The 
intimation may unite with their own misgivings to 
regulate their sensibility, and to bring in, sooner 
than it would otherwise have arrived, a more dis- 
creet and sound judgment. 
If it should excite wonder that men of ability, in 
later life, whose understandings have been rendered 
acute by practice in affairs, should be so easily and 
so far imposed upon when they happen to take up 
a new work in verse, this appears to be the cause ; 
— that, having discontinued their attention to poetry, 
whatever progress may have been made in other 
departments of knowledge, they have not, as to 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

this art, advanced in true discernment beyond the 
age of youth. If, then, a new poem fall in their 
way, whose attractions are of that kind which 
would have enraptured them during the heat of 
youth, the judgment not being improved to a 
degree that they shall be disgusted, they are 
dazzled; and prize and cherish the faults for 
having had power to make the present time vanish 
before them, and to throw the mind back, as by 
enchantment, into the happiest season of life. As 
they read, powers seem to be revived, passions are 
regenerated, and pleasures restored. The Book 
was probably taken up after an escape from the 
burden of business, and with a wish to forget the 
world, and all its vexations and anxieties. Having 
obtained this wish, and so much more, it is natural 
that they should make report as they have felt. 
If Men of mature age, through want of practice, 
be thus easily beguiled into admiration of absur- 
dities, extravagances, and misplaced ornaments, 
thinking it proper that their understandings should 
enjoy a holiday, while they are unbending their 
minds with verse, it may be expected that such 
Readers will resemble their former selves also in 
strength of prejudice, and an inaptitude to be 
moved by the unostentatious beauties of a pure 
style. In the higher poetry, an enlightened Critic 
chiefly looks for a reflection of the wisdom of the 
heart and the grandeur of the imagination. 
Wherever these appear, simplicity accompanies 
them ; Magnificence herself, when legitimate, 
depending upon a simplicity of her own, to regulate 
her ornaments. But it is a well-known property 
of human nature, that our estimates are ever 
governed by comparisons, of which we are conscious 
with various degrees of distinctness. Is it not, 
then, inevitable (confining these observations to the 
effects of style merely) that an eye, accustomed to 
the glaring hues of diction by which such Readers 
are caught and excited, will for the most part be 
rather repelled than attracted by an original Work, 
the colouring of which is disposed according to a 
pure and refined scheme of harmony \ It is in the 
fine arts as in the affairs of life, no man can serve 
(i. e. obey with zeal and fidelity) two Masters. 
As Poetry is most just to its own divine origin 
when it administers the comforts and breathes the 
spirit of religion, they who have learned to perceive 
this truth, and who betake themselves to reading 
verse for sacred purposes, must be preserved from 
numerous illusions to which the two Classes of 
Readers, whom we have been considering, are 
liable. But, as the mind grows serious from the 
weight of life, the range of its passions is contracted 

accordingly; and its sympathies become so ex- 
clusive, that many species of high excellence 
wholly escape, or but languidly excite, its notice. 
Besides, men who read from religious or moral 
inclinations, even when the subject is of that kind 
which they approve, are beset with misconceptions 
and mistakes peculiar to themselves. Attaching 
so much importance to the truths which interest 
them, they are prone to over-rate the Authors by 
whom those truths are expressed and enforced. 
They come prepared to impart so much passion to 
the Poet's language, that they remain unconscious 
how little, in fact, they receive from it. And, on 
the other hand, religious faith is to him who holds 
it so momentous a thing, and error appears to be 
attended with such tremendous consequences, that, 
if opinions touching upon religion occur which the 
Reader condemns, he not only cannot sympathise 
with them, however animated the expression, but 
there is, for the most part, an end put to all satis- 
faction and enjoyment. Love, if it before existed, 
is converted into dislike ; and the heart of the 
Reader is set against the Author and his book. — 
To these excesses, they, who from their professions 
ought to be the most guarded against them, are 
perhaps the most liable ; I mean those sects whose 
religion, being from the calculating understanding, 
is cold and formal. For when Christianity, the 
religion of humility, is founded upon the proudest 
faculty of our nature, what can be expected but 
contradictions \ Accordingly, believers of this cast 
are at one time contemptuous ; at another, being 
troubled, as they are and must be, with inward 
misgivings, they are jealous and suspicious ; — and 
at all seasons, they are under temptation to supply 
by the heat with which they defend their tenets, 
the animation which is wanting to the constitution 
of the religion itself. 
Faith was given to man that his affections, 
detached from the treasures of time, might be 
inclined to settle upon those of eternity: — the 
elevation of his nature, which this habit produces 
on earth, being to him a presumptive evidence of 
a future state of existence ; and giving him a title 
to partake of its holiness. The religious man 
values what he sees chiefly as an 'imperfect 
shadowing forth' of what he is incapable of seeing. 
The concerns of religion refer to indefinite objects, 
and are too weighty for the mind to support them 
without relieving itself by resting a great part of 
the burthen upon words and symbols. The com- 
merce between Man and his Maker cannot be 
carried on but by a process where much is repre- 
sented in little, and the Infinite Being accommo- 

fi 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

dates himself to a finite capacity. In all this may 
be perceived the affinity between religion and 
poetry ; between religion — making up the deficien- 
cies of reason by faith ; and poetry — passionate for 
the instruction of reason; between religion — whose 
element is infinitude, and whose ultimate trust is 
the supreme of things, submitting herself to circum- 
scription, and reconciled to substitutions; and 
poetry— ethereal and transcendent, yet incapable 
to sustain her existence without sensuous incarna- 
tion. In this community of nature may be per- 
ceived also the lurking incitements of kindred 
error ; — so that we shall find that no poetry has 
been more subject to distortion, than that species, 
the argument and scope of which is religious ; and 
no lovers of the art have gone farther astray than 
the pious and the devout. 
Whither then shall we turn for that union of 
qualifications which must necessarily exist before 
the decisions of a critic can be of absolute value  
For a mind at once poetical and philosophical ; for 
a critic whose affections are as free and kindly as 
the spirit of sqciety, and whose understanding is 
severe as that of dispassionate government ? Where 
are we to look for that initiatory composure of 
mind which no selfishness can disturb ? For a 
natural sensibility that has been tutored into 
correctness without losing anything of its quick- 
ness ; and for active faculties, capable of answer- 
ing the demands which an Author of original 
imagination shall make upon them, associated 
with a judgment that cannot be duped into 
admiration by aught that is unworthy of it? — 
among those and those only, who, never having 
suffered their youthful love of poetry to remit 
much of its force, have applied to the considera- 
tion of the laws of this art the best power of their 
understandings. At the same time it must be 
observed — that, as this Class comprehends the 
only judgments which are trust-worthy, so does it 
include the most erroneous and perverse. For to 
be mis-taught is worse than to be untaught ; and 
no perverseness equals that which is supported by 
system, no errors are so difficult to root out as 
those which the understanding has pledged its 
credit to uphold. In this Class are contained 
censors, who, if they be pleased with what is good, 
are pleased with it only by imperfect glimpses, and 
upon false principles ; who, should they generalise 
rightly, to a certain point, are sure to suffer for it 
in the end ; who, if they stumble upon a sound 
rule, are fettered by misapplying it, or by straining 
it too far ; being incapable of perceiving when it 
ought to yield to one of higher order. In it are 

found critics too petulant to be passive to a genuine 
poet, and too feeble to grapple with him ; men, 
who take upon them to report of the course which 
he holds whom they are utterly unable to accom- 
pany, — confounded if he turn quick upon the wing, 
dismayed if he soar steadily ' into the region ;' — 
men of palsied imaginations and indurated hearts ; 
in whose minds all healthy action is languid, who 
therefore feed as the many direct them, or, with 
the many, are greedy after vicious provocatives ; 
— judges, whose censure is auspicious, and whose 
praise ominous ! In this class meet together the 
two extremes of best and worst. 
The observations presented in the foregoing 
series are of too ungracious a nature to have been 
made without reluctance ; and, were it only on 
this account, I would invite the reader to try them 
by the test of comprehensive experience. If the 
number of judges who can be confidently relied 
upon be in reality so small, it ought to follow that 
partial notice only, or neglect, perhaps long con- 
tinued, or attention wholly inadequate to their 
merits — must have been the fate of most works in 
the higher departments of poetry ; and that, on 
the other hand, numerous productions have blazed 
into popularity, and have passed away, leaving 
scarcely a trace behind them : it will be further 
found, that when Authors shall have at length raised 
themselves into general admiration and maintained 
their ground, errors and prejudices have prevailed 
concerning their genius and their works, which the 
few who are conscious of those errors and prejudices 
would deplore ; if they were not recompensed by 
perceiving that there are select Spirits for whom 
it is ordained that their fame shall be in the 
world an existence like that of Virtue, which 
owes its being to the struggles it makes, and its 
vigour to the enemies whom it provokes ; — a viva- 
cious quality, ever doomed to meet with opposition, 
and still triumphing over it ; and, from the nature 
of its dominion, incapable of being brought to the 
sad conclusion of Alexander, when he wept that 
there were no more worlds for him to conquer. 
Let us take a hasty retrospect of the poetical 
literature of this Country for the greater part of 
the last two centuries, and see if the facts support 
these inferences. 
Who is there that now reads the "Creation" 
of Dubartas ? Yet all Europe once resounded 
with his praise ; he was caressed by kings ; and, 
when his Poem was translated into our language, 
the Faery Queen faded before it. The name of 
Spenser, whose genius is of a higher order than 
even that of Ariosto, is at this day scarcely 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

known beyond the limits of the British Isles. 
And if the value of his works is to be esti- 
mated from the attention now paid to them by 
his countrymen, compared with that which they 
bestow on those of some other writers, it must 
be pronounced small indeed. 
'The laurel, meed of mighty conquerors 
And poets sage ' — 
are his own words ; but his wisdom has, in this 
particular, been his worst enemy : while its 
opposite, whether in the shape of folly or madness, 
has been their best friend. But he was a great 
power, and bears a high name : the laurel has 
been awarded to him. 
A dramatic Author, if he write for the stage, 
must adapt himself to the taste of the audience, or 
they will not endure him ; accordingly the mighty 
genius of Shakspeare was listened to. The people 
were delighted : but I am not sufficiently versed 
in stage antiquities to determine whether they did 
not flock as eagerly to the representation of many 
pieces of contemporary Authors, wholly undeserv- 
ing to appear upon the same boards. Had there 
been a formal contest for superiority among 
dramatic writers, that Shakspeare, like his pre- 
decessors Sophocles and Euripides, would have 
often been subject to the mortification of seeing 
the prize adjudged to sorry competitors, becomes 
too probable, when we reflect that the admirers of 
Settle and Shadwell were, in a later age, as nume- 
rous, and reckoned as respectable in point of talent, 
as those of Dryden. At all events, that Shak- 
speare stooped to accommodate himself to the 
People, is sufficiently apparent ; and one of the 
most striking proofs of his almost omnipotent 
genius, is, that he could turn to such glorious 
purpose those materials which the prepossessions 
of the age compeUed him to make use of. Yet 
even this marvellous skill appears not to have 
been enough to prevent his rivals from having 
some advantage over him in public estimation ; 
else how can we account for passages and scenes 
that exist in his works, unless upon a supposition 
that some of the grossest of them, a fact which in 
my own mind I have no doubt of, were foisted in by 
the Players, for the gratification of the many \ 
But that his Works, whatever might be their 
reception upon the stage, made but little impres- 
sion upon the ruling Intellects of the time, may 
be inferred from the fact that Lord Bacon, in his 
multifarious writings, nowhere either quotes or 
alludes to him. — His dramatic excellence enabled 

 The learned Hakewill (a third edition of whose hook 

him to resume possession of the stage after the 
Restoration ; but Dryden tells us that in his time 
two of the plays of Beaumont and Fletcher were 
acted for one of Shakspeare's. And so faint and 
limited was the perception of the poetic beauties of 
his dramas in the time of Pope, that, in his Edition 
of the Plays, with a view of rendering to the gene- 
ral reader a necessaiy service, he printed between 
inverted commas those passages which he thought 
most worthy of notice. 
At this day, the French Critics have abated 
nothing of their aversion to this darling of our 
Nation : the English, with their bouffon de 
Shakspeare,' is as familiar an expression among 
them as in the time of Voltaire. Baron Grimm is 
the only French writer who seems to have perceived 
his infinite superiority to the first names of the 
French Theatre ; an advantage which the Parisian 
critic owed to his German blood and German 
education. The most enlightened Italians, though 
well acquainted with our language, are wholly 
incompetent to measure the proportions of Shak- 
speare. The Germans only, of foreign nations, 
are approaching towards a knowledge and feeling 
of what he is. In some respects they have ac- 
quired a superiority over the fellow-countrymen of 
the Poet : for among us it is a current, I might say, 
an established opinion, that Shakspeare is justly 
praised when he is pronounced to be 'a wild 
irregular genius, in whom great faults are com- 
pensated by great beauties.' How long may it 
be before this misconception passes away, and it 
becomes universally acknowledged that the judg- 
ment of Shakspeare in the selection of his mate- 
rials, and in the manner in which he has made 
them, heterogeneous as they often are, constitute 
a unity of their own, and contribute all to one 
great end, is not less admirable than his imagi- 
nation, his invention, and his intuitive knowledge 
of human Nature ! 
There is extant a small Volume of miscellaneous 
poems, in which Shakspeare expresses his own 
feelings in his own person. It is not difficult to 
conceive that the Editor, George Steevens, should 
have been insensible to the beauties of one portion 
of that Volume, the Sonnets ; though in no part 
of the writings of this Poet is found, in an equal 
compass, a greater number of exquisite feelings 
felicitously expressed. But, from regard to the 

bears date ), writing to refute the error touching 
Nature's perpetual and universal decay,' cites trium- 
phantly the names of Ariosto, Tasso, Bartas, and Spenser, 
as instances that poetic genius had not degenerated ; but 
he makes no mention of Shakspeare. 


 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

Critic's own credit, lie would not have ventured to 
talk of an act of parliament not being strong 
enough to compel the perusal of those little pieces, 
if he had not known that the people of England 
were ignorant of the treasures contained in them : 
and if he had not, moreover, shared the too com- 
mon propensity of human nature to exult over a 
supposed fall into the mire of a genius whom he 
had been compelled to regard with admiration, as 
an inmate of the celestial regions — ' there sitting 
where he durst not soar.' 
Nine years before the death of Shakspeare, 
Milton was born ; and early in life he published 
several small poems, which, though on their first 
appearance they were praised by a few of the 
judicious, were afterwards neglected to that degree, 
that Pope in his youth could borrow from them 
without risk of its being known. Whether these 
poems are at this day justly appreciated,  will 
not undertake to decide : nor would it imply a 
severe reflection upon the mass of readers to 
suppose the contrary ; seeing that a man of the 
acknowledged genius of Voss, the German poet, 
could suffer their spirit to evaporate ; and could 
change their character, as is done in the trans- 
lation made by him of the most popular of those 
pieces. At all events, it is certain that these Poems 
of Milton are now much read, and loudly praised ; 
yet were they little heard of till more than ISO 
years after then' publication ; and of the Sonnets, 
Dr. Johnson, as appears from Boswell's Life of 
him, was in the habit of thinking and speaking 
as contemptuously as Steevens wrote upon those 
of Shakspeare. 
About the time when the Pindaric odes of 
Cowley and his imitators, and the productions of 
that class of curious thinkers whom Dr. Johnson 
has strangely styled metaphysical Poets, were begin- 
ning to lose something of that extravagant admi- 
ration which they had excited, the Paradise Lost 
made its appearance. ' Fit audience find though 
few,' was the petition addressed by the Poet to his 
inspiring Muse. I have said elsewhere that he 
gained more than he asked ; this I believe to be 
tme ; but Dr. Johnson has fallen into a gross 
mistake when he attempts to prove, by the sale of 

 This flippant insensibility was publicly reprehended 
by Mr. Coleridge in a course of Lectures upon Poetry 
given by him at the Royal Institution. For the various 
merits of thought and language in Shakspeare's Sonnets, 
see Numbers, , , , , , . , , B, , , , , 
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
and many others. 

the work, that Milton's Countrymen were 'just to 
it ' upon its first appearance. Thirteen hundred 
Copies were sold in two years ; an uncommon 
example, he asserts, of the prevalence of genius 
in opposition to so much recent enmity as Milton's 
public conduct had excited. But, be it remem- 
bered that, if Milton's political and religious 
opinions, and the manner in which he announced 
them, had raised him many enemies, they had 
procured him numerous friends; who, as all 
personal danger was passed away at the time of 
publication, would be eager to procure the master- 
work of a man whom they revered, and whom 
they would be proud of praising. Take, from the 
number of purchasers, persons of this class, and 
also those who wished to possess the Poem as a 
religious work, and but few I fear would be left 
who sought for it on account of its poetical merits. 
The demand did not immediately increase ; ' for,' 
says Dr. Johnson, ' many more readers ' (lie means 
persons in the habit of reading poetry) ' than were 
supplied at first the Nation did not afford.' How 
careless must a writer be who can make this asser- 
tion in the face of so many existing title-pages to 
belie it ! Turning to my own shelves, I find the 
folio of Cowley, seventh edition, . A book 
near it is Flatman's Poems, fourth edition,  ; 
Waller, fifth edition, same date. The Poems of 
Norris of Bemerton not long after went, I believe, 
through nine editions. What further demand 
there might be for these works I do not know ; 
but I well remember, that, twenty-five years ago, 
the booksellers' stalls in London swarmed with 
the folios of Cowley. This is not mentioned in 
disparagement of that able writer and amiable 
man ; but merely to show — that, if Milton's work 
were not more read, it was not because readers 
did not exist at the time. The early editions of 
the Paradise Lost were printed in a shape which 
allowed them to be sold at a low price, yet only 
three-thousand copies of the Work were sold in 
eleven years ; and the Nation, says Dr. Johnson, 
had been satisfied from  to , that is, 
forty-one years, with only two editions of the 
Works of Shakspeare; which probably did not 
together make one-thousand Copies ; facts adduced 
by the critic to prove the ' paucity of Readers.' — 
There were readers in multitudes ; but their 
money went for other purposes, as their admira- 
tion was fixed elsewhere. We are authorized, 
then, to affirm, that the reception of the Paradise 
Lost, and the slow progress of its fame, are proofs 
as striking as can be desired that the positions 
which I am attempting to establish are not erro- 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

neous. — How amusing to shape to one's self 
such a critique as a Wit of Charles's days, or a 
Lord of the Miscellanies or trading Journalist of 
King William's time, would have brought forth, if 
he had set his faculties industriously to work upon 
this Poem, every where impregnated with original 
excellence. 
So strange indeed are the obliquities of admi- 
ration, that they whose opinions are much influ- 
enced by authority will often be tempted to think 
that there are no fixed principles f in human 
nature for this art to rest upon. I have been 
honoured by being permitted to peruse in MS. a 
tract composed between the period of the Revolu- 
tion and the close of that century. It is the 
Work of an English Peer of high accomplishments, 
its object to form the character and direct tbe 
studies of his son. Perhaps nowhere does a more 
beautiful treatise of the kind exist. The good 
sense and wisdom of the thoughts, the delicacy 
of the feelings, and the charm of the style, are, 
throughout, equally conspicuous. Yet the Author, 
selecting among the Poets of his own country 
those whom he deems most worthy of his son's 
perusal, particularises only Lord Rochester, Sir 
John Denham, and Cowley. Writing about the 
same time, Shaftesbury, an author at present 
unjustly depreciated, describes the English Muses 
as only yet lisping in their cradles. 
The arts by which Pope, soon afterwards, con- 
trived to procure to himself a more general and 
a higher reputation than perhaps any English Poet 
ever attained during his life-time, are known to 
the judicious. And as well known is it to them, 
that the undue exertion of those arts is the cause 
why Pope has for some time held a rank in litera- 
ture, to which, if he had not been seduced by an 
over-love of immediate popularity, and had con- 
fided more in his native genius, he never could 
have descended. He bewitched the nation by his 
melody, and dazzled it by his polished style, and 
was himself blinded by his own success. Having 
wandered from humanity in his Eclogues with 
boyish inexperience, the praise, which these com- 
positions obtained, tempted him into a belief that 

 Hughes is express upon this subject : in his dedica. 
tion of Spenser's Works to Lord Somers, he writes thus. 
' It was your Lordship's encouraging a beautiful Edition 
of Paradise Lost that first brought that incomparable 
Poem to be generally known and esteemed.' 
t This opinion seems actually to have been entertained 
by Adam Smith, the worst critic, David Hume not excep- 
ted, that Scotland, a soil to which this sort of weed seems 
natural, has produced. 

Nature was not to be trusted, at least in pastoral 
Poetry. To prove this by example, he put his 
friend Gay upon writing those Eclogues which 
their author intended to be burlesque. The insti- 
gator of the work, and his admirers, could perceive 
in them nothing but what was ridiculous. Never- 
theless, though these Poems contain some detest- 
able passages, the effect, as Dr. Johnson well 
observes, ' of reality and truth became conspicuous 
even when the intention was to show them gro- 
velling and degraded.' The Pastorals, ludicrous 
to such as prided themselves upon their refine- 
ment, in spite of those disgusting passages, 'became 
popular, and were read with delight, as just 
representations of rural manners and occupations.' 
Something less than sixty years after the publi- 
cation of the Paradise Lost appeared Thomson's 
Winter ; which was speedily followed by his other 
Seasons. It is a work of inspiration ; much of it is 
written from himself, and nobly from himself. How 
was it received? 'It was no sooner read,' says one 
of his contemporary biographers, 'than universally 
admired : those only excepted who had not been 
used to feehorto look forany thing in poetry,beyond 
a point of satirical or epigrammatic wit, a smart 
antithesis richly trimmed with rhyme, or the softness 
of an elegiac complaint. To such his manly classical 
spirit could not readily commend itself ; till, after 
a more attentive perusal, they had got the better 
of their prejudices, and either acquired or affected 
a truer taste. A few others stood aloof, merely 
because they had long before fixed the articles of 
their poetical creed, and resigned themselves to 
an absolute despair of ever seeing any thing new 
and original. These were somewhat mortified 
to find their notions disturbed by the appearance 
of a poet, who seemed to owe nothing but to 
nature and his own genius. But, in a short time, 
the applause became unanimous ; every one won- 
dering how so many pictures, and pictures so 
familiar, should have moved them but faintly to 
what they felt in his descriptions. His digressions 
too, the overflowings of a tender benevolent heart, 
charmed the reader no less ; leaving him in doubt, 
whether he should more admire the Poet or love 
the Man.' 
This case appears to bear strongly against us : — 
but we must distinguish between wonder and legi- 
timate admiration. The subject of the work is 
the changes produced in the appearances of 
nature by the revolution of the year : and, by 
undertaking to write in verse, Thomson pledged 
himself to treat his subject as became a Poet. 
Now it is remarkable that, excepting the nocture 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

nal Reverie of Lady Winchilsea, and a passage or 
two in the Windsor Forest of Pope, the poetry of 
the period intervening between the publication of 
the Paradise Lost and the Seasons does not con- 
tain a single new image of external nature ; and 
scarcely presents a familiar one from which it can 
be inferred that the eye of the Poet had been 
steadily fixed upon his object, much less that his 
feelings had urged him to work upon it in the 
spirit of genuine imagination. To what a low 
state knowledge of the most obvious and important 
phenomena had sunk, is evident from the style 
in which Dryden has executed a description of 
Night in one of his Tragedies, and Pope his 
translation of the celebrated moonlight scene in 
the Ihad. A blind man, in the habit of attending 
accurately to descriptions casually dropped from 
the lips of those around him, might easily depict 
these appearances with more truth. Dryden's 
lines are vague, bombastic, and senseless ; those 
of Pope, though he had Homer to guide him, are 
throughout false and contradictory. The verses 
of Dryden, once highly celebrated, are forgotten ; 
those of Pope still retain their hold upon public 
estimation, — nay, there is not a passage of descrip- 
tive poetry, which at this day finds so many and 
such ardent admirers. Strange to think of an 
enthusiast, as may have been the case with thou- 
sands, reciting those verses under the cope of a 
moonlight sky, without having his raptures in the 
least disturbed by a suspicion of their absurdity ! 
— If these two distinguished writers could habitu- 
ally think that the visible universe was of so little 
consequence to a poet, that it was scarcely neces- 
sary for him to cast his eyes upon it, we may be 
assured that those passages of the elder poets 
which faithfully and poetically describe the phe- 
nomena of nature, were not at that time holden in 
much estimation, and that there was little accurate 
attention paid to those appearances. 
Wonder is the natural product of Ignorance ; 
and as the soil was in such good condition at the 
time of the publication of the Seasons, the crop 
was doubtless abundant. Neither individuals nor 
nations become corrupt all at once, nor are they 
enlightened in a moment. Thomson was an in- 

 Cortes alone in a night-gown. 
All things are hush'd as Nature's self lay dead ; 
The mountains seem to nod their drowsy head. 
The little Birds in dreams their songs repeat, 
And sleeping Flowers heneath the Night-dew sweat: 
Even Lust and Envy sleep ; yet Love denies 
Rest to my soul, and slumber to my eyes. 
Dryden's Indian Emperor. 

spired poet, but he could not work miracles ; hi 
cases where the art of seeing had in some degree 
been learned, the teacher would further the pro- 
ficiency of his pupils, but he could do little more ; 
though so far does vanity assist men in acts of 
self-deception, that many would often fancy they 
recognised a likeness when they knew nothing of 
the original. Having shown that much of what 
his biographer deemed genuine admiration must 
in fact have been blind wonderment — how is the 
rest to be accounted for ? — Thomson was fortunate 
in the very title of his poem, which seemed to 
bring it home to the prepared sympathies of every 
one : in the next place, notwithstanding his high 
powers, he writes a vicious style ; and his false 
ornaments are exactly of that kind which would 
be most likely to strike the undiscerning. He 
likewise abounds with sentimental common-places, 
that, from the manner in which they were brought 
forward, bore an imposing air of novelty. In any 
well-used copy of the Seasons the book generally 
opens of itself with the rhapsody on love, or with 
one of the stories (perhaps Damon and Musidora) ; 
these also are prominent in our collections of 
Extracts, and are the parts of his Work, which, 
after all, were probably most efficient in first re- 
commending the author to general notice. Pope, 
repaying praises which he had received, and wish- 
ing to extol him to the highest, only styles him 'an 
elegant and philosophical Poet ; ' nor are we able 
to collect any unquestionable proofs that the true 
characteristics of Thomson's genius as an imagi- 
native poet were perceived, till the elder Warton, 
almost forty years after the publication of the 
Seasons, pointed them out by a note in his Essay 
on the Life and Writings of Pope. In the Castle 
of Indolence (of which Gray speaks so coldly) 
these characteristics were almost as conspicuously 
displayed, and in verse more harmonious, and 
diction more pure. Yet that fine poem was 
neglected on its appearance, and is at this day the 
delight only of a few ! 
When Thomson died, Collins breathed forth his 
regrets in an Elegiac Poem, in which he pro- 
nounces a poetical curse upon him who should 
regard with insensibility the place where the 
Poet's remains were deposited. The Poems of 
the mourner himself have now passed through 

 Since these observations upon Thomson were written, 
I have perused the second edition of his Seasons, and find 
that even that does not contain the most striking passages 
which Warton points out for admiration ; these, with 
other improvements, throughout the whole work, must 
have been added at a later period. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

innumerable editions, and are universally known ; 
but if, when Collins died, the same kind of impre- 
cation had been pronounced by a surviving admi- 
rer, small is the number whom it would not have 
comprehended. The notice which his poems 
attained during his life-time was so small, and of 
course the sale so insignificant, that not long 
before his death he deemed it right to repay to 
the bookseller the sum which he had advanced 
for them, and threw the edition into the fire. 
Next in importance to the Seasons of Thomson, 
though at considerable distance from that work in 
order of time, come the Reliques of Ancient 
English Poetry ; collected, new-modelled, and in 
many instances (if such a contradiction in terms 
may be used) composed by the Editor, Dr. Percy. 
This work did not steal silently into the world, as 
is evident from the number of legendary tales, that 
appeared not long after its publication ; and had 
been modelled, as the authors persuaded them- 
selves, after the old Ballad. The Compilation was 
however ill suited to the then existing taste of 
city society; and Dr. Johnson, 'mid the little 
senate to which he gave laws, was not sparing in 
his exertions to make it an object of contempt. The 
critic triumphed, the legendary imitators were de- 
servedly disregarded, and, as undeservedly, their 
ill-imitated models sank, in this country, into 
temporary neglect ; while Burger, and other able 
writers of Germany, were translating, or imitating 
these Reliques, and composing, with the aid of 
inspiration thence derived, poems which are the 
delight of the German nation. Dr. Percy was so 
abashed by the ridicule flung upon his labours from 
the ignorance and insensibility of the persons with 
whom he lived, that, though while he was writing 
under a mask he had not wanted resolution to 
follow his genius into the regions of true simplicity 
and genuine pathos (as is evinced by the exquisite 
ballad of Sir Cauline and by many other pieces), 
yet when he appeared in his own person and 
character as a poetical writer, he adopted, as in the 
tale of the Hermit of Warkworth, a diction scarcely 
in any one of its features distinguishable from the 
vague, the glossy, and unfeeling language of his 
day. I mention this remarkable fact with regret, 

 Shenstone, in his Schoolmistress, gives a still more 
remarkable instance of this timidity. On its first appear- 
ance, (See D'Israeli's d Series of the Curiosities of Litera- 
ture) the Poem was accompanied with an absurd prose 
commentary, showing, as indeed some incongruous expres- 
sions in the text imply, that the whole was intended for 
burlesque. In subsequent editions, the commentary was 
dropped, and the People have since continued to read in 

esteeming the genius of Dr. Percy in this kind of 
writing superior to that of any other man by whom 
in modern times it has been cultivated. That even 
Burger (to whom Klopstock gave, in my hearing, 
a commendation which he denied to Goethe and 
Schiller, pronouncing him to be a genuine poet, and 
one of the few among the Germans whose works 
would last) had not the fine sensibility of Percy, 
might be shown from many passages, in which he 
has deserted his original only to go astray. For 
example, 
Now daye was gone, and night was come, 
And all were fast asleepe, 
All save the Lady Emeline, 
Who sate in her bowre to weepe : 
And soone she heard her true Love's voice 
Low whispering at the walle, 
Awake, awake, my dear Ladye, 
'Tis I thy true-love call. 
Which is thus tricked out and dilated : 
Als nun die Nacht Gebirg' und Thai 
Vermummt in Kabenschatten, 
Und Hoehburgs Lampen iiberall 
Schon ausgeflimmert batten, 
Und alles tief entschlafen war ; 
Doch nur das Fraulein immerdar, 
Voll Fieberangst, noch wachte, 
Und seinen Ritter dachte : 
Da horch ! Ein siisser Liebeston 
Kam leis' empor geflogen. 
" Ho, Trudchen. ho I Da bin ich schon ! 
Frisch auf ! Dich angezogen !" 
But from humble ballads we must ascend to 
heroics. 
All hail, Macpherson ! hail to thee, Sire of 
Ossian ! The Phantom was begotten by the snug 
embrace of an impudent Highlander upon a cloud 
of tradition — it travelled southward, where it was 
greeted with acclamation, and the thin Consistence 
took its course through Europe, upon the breath of 
popular applause. The Editor of the " Reliques" 
had indirectly preferred a claim to the praise of 
invention, by not concealing that his supplementary 
labours were considerable ! how selfish his conduct, 
contrasted with that of the disinterested Gael, who, 
like Lear, gives his kingdom away, and is content 
to become a pensioner upon his own issue for a 
beggarly pittance ! — Open this far-famed Book ! — 
I have done so at random, and the beginning of 
the "Epic Poem Temora," in eight Books, presents 
itself. ' The blue waves of Ullin roU in light. The 
green hills are covered with day. Trees shake 

seriousness, doing for the Author what he had not courage 
openly to venture upon for himself. 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

their dusky heads in the breeze. Grey torrente 
pour their noisy streams. Two green hills with 
aged oaks surround a narrow plain. The blue 
course of a stream is there. On its banks stood 
Cairbar of Atha. His spear supports the king; 
the red eyes of his fear are sad. Cormac rises on 
his soul with all his ghastly wounds.' Precious 
memorandums from the pocket-book of the blind 
Ossian ! 
If it be unbecoming, as I acknowledge that for 
the most part it is, to speak disrespectfully of 
Works that have enjoyed for a length of time a 
widely-spread reputation, without at the same time 
producing irrefragable proofs of their unworthiness, 
let me be forgiven upon this occasion. — Having 
had the good fortune to be born and reared in a 
mountainous country, from my very childhood I 
have felt the falsehood that pervades the volumes 
imposed upon the world under the name of Ossian, 
From what I saw with my own eyes, I knew that 
the imagery was spurious. In nature every thing 
is distinct, yet nothing denned into absolute 
independent singleness. In Macpherson's work, it 
is exactly the reverse; every thing (that is not 
stolen) is in this manner defined, insulated, dislo- 
cated, deadened, — yet nothing distinct. It will 
always be so when words are substituted for things. 
To say that the characters never could exist, that 
the manners are impossible, and that a dream has 
more substance than the whole state of society, as 
there depicted, is doing nothing more than pro- 
nouncing a censure which Macpherson defied ; 
when, with the steeps of Morven before his eyes, 
he could talk so familiarly of his Car-borne heroes ; 
— of Morven, which, if one may judge from its 
appearance at the distance of a few miles, contains 
scarcely an acre of ground sufficiently accommo- 
dating for a sledge to be trailed along its surface. — 
Mr. Malcolm Laing has ably shown that the diction 
of this pretended translation is a motley assemblage 
from all quarters ; but he is so fond of making out 
parallel passages as to call poor Macpherson to 
account for his l ands' and his ' butsT and he has 
weakened his argument by conducting it as if he 
thought that every striking resemblance was a 
conscious plagiarism. It is enough that the coinci- 
dences are too remarkable for its being probable or 
possible that they could arise in different minds 
without communication between them. Now as 
the Translators of the Bible, and Shakspeare, 
Milton, and Pope, could not be indebted to Mac- 
pherson, it follows that he must have owed his fine 
feathers to them ; unless we are prepared gravely 
to assert, with Madame de Stae'l, that many of the 

characteristic beauties of our most celebrated 
English Poets are derived from the ancient Fin- 
gallian ; in which case the modern translator would 
have been but giving back to Ossian his own. — It 
is consistent that Lucien Buonaparte, who could 
censure Milton for having surrounded Satan in the 
infernal regions with courtly and regal splendour, 
should pronounce the modern Ossian to be the 
glory of Scotland ; — a country that has produced a 
Dunbar, a Buchanan, a Thomson, and a Burns! 
These opinions are of ill omen for the Epic ambi- 
tion of him who has given them to the world. 
Yet, much as those pretended treasures of 
antiquity have been admired, they have been 
wholly uninfluential upon the literature of the 
Country. No succeeding writer appears to have 
caught from them a ray of inspiration ; no author, 
in the least distinguished, has ventured formally 
to imitate them — except the boy, Chatterton, on 
their first appearance. He had perceived, from 
the successful trials which he himself had made 
in literary forgery, how few critics were able to 
distinguish between a real ancient medal and a 
counterfeit of modern manufacture ; and he set 
himself to the work of filling a magazine with 
Saxon Poems, — counterparts of those of Ossian, 
as like his as one of his misty stars is to another. 
This incapability to amalgamate with the literature 
of the Island, is, in my estimation, a decisive 
proof that the book is essentially unnatural ; nor 
should I require any other to demonstrate it to 
be a forgery, audacious as worthless. — Contrast, 
in this respect, the effect of Macpherson's publi- 
cation with the Reliques of Percy, so unassuming, 
so modest in their pretensions ! — I have already 
stated how much Germany is indebted to this 
latter work ; and for our own country, its poetry 
has been absolutely redeemed by it. I do not 
think that there is an able writer in verse of the 
present day who would not be proud to acknow- 
ledge his obligations to the Reliques ; I know 
that, it is so with my friends ; and, for myself, 
I am happy in this occasion to make a public 
avowal of my own. 
Dr. Johnson, more fortunate in his contempt of 
the labours of Macpherson than those of his modest 
friend, was solicited not long after to furnish 
Prefaces biographical and critical for the works of 
some of the most eminent English Poets. The 
booksellers took upon themselves to make the col- 
lection ; they referred probably to the most popular 
miscellanies, and, unquestionably, to their books 
of accounts ; and decided upon the claim of authors 
to be admitted into a body of the most eminent, 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

from the familiarity of their names with the 
readers of that day, and by the profits, which, 
from the sale of his works, each had brought and 
was bringing to the Trade. The Editor was 
allowed a limited exercise of discretion, and the 
Authors whom he recommended are scarcely to 
be mentioned without a smile. We open the 
volume of Prefatory Lives, and to our astonish- 
ment the first name we find is that of Cowley ! — 
What is become of the morning-star of English 
Poetry? Where is the bright Elizabethan con- 
stellation ? Or, if names be more acceptable than 
images, where is the ever-to-be-honoured Chaucer ? 
where is Spenser ? where Sidney ? and, lastly, 
where he, whose rights as a poet, contradistin- 
guished from those which he is universally allowed 
to possess as a dramatist, we have vindicated, — 
where Shakspeare? — These, and a multitude of 
others not unworthy to be placed near them, 
their contemporaries and successors, we have not. 
But in their stead, we have (could better be 
expected when pi'ecedence was to be settled by 
an abstract of reputation at any given period 
made, as in this case before us?) Roscommon, 
and Stepney, and Phillips, and Walsh, and Smith, 
and Duke, andKing, and Spratt — Halifax, Granville, 
Sheffield, Congreve, Broome, and other reputed 
Magnates — metrical writers utterly worthless and 
useless, except for occasions like the present, 
when their productions are referred to as evidence 
what a small quantity of brain is necessary to 
procure a considerable stock of admiration, pro- 
vided the aspirant will accommodate himself to the 
likings and fashions of his day. 
As I do not mean to bring down this retrospect 
to our own times, it may with propriety be closed 
at the era of this distinguished event. From the 
literature of other ages and countries, proofs 
equally cogent might have been adduced, that 
the opinions announced in the former part of this 
Essay are founded upon truth. It was not an 
agreeable office, nor a prudent undertaking, to 
declare them ; but their importance seemed to 
render it a duty. It may still be asked, where 
lies the particular relation of what has been said 
to these Volumes? — The question will be easily 
answered by the discerning Reader who is old 
enough to remember the taste that prevailed when 
some of these poems were first published, seventeen 
years ago ; who has also observed to what degree 
the poetry of this Island has since that period 
been coloured by them ; and who is further aware 
of the unremitting hostility with which, upon some 
principle or other, they have each and all been 

opposed. A sketch of my own notion of the 
constitution of Fame has been given ; and, as far 
as concerns myself, I have cause to be satisfied. 
The love, the admiration, the indifference, the 
slight, the aversion, and even the contempt, with 
which these Poems have been received, knowing, 
as I do, the source within my own mind, from 
which they have proceeded, and the labour and 
pains, which, when labour and pains appeared 
needful, have been bestowed upon them, must all, 
if I think consistently, be received as pledges and 
tokens, bearing the same general impression? 
though widely different in value ; — they are all 
proofs that for the present time I have not 
laboured in vain ; and afford assurances, more 
or less authentic, that the products of my industry 
will endure. 
If there be one conclusion more forcibly pressed 
upon us than another by the review which has 
been given of the fortunes and fate of poetical 
Works, it is this, — that every author, as far as 
he is great and at the same time original, has 
had the task of creating the taste by which he is 
to be enjoyed : so has it been, so will it continue 
to be. This remark was long since made to me 
by the philosophical Friend for the separation of 
whose poems from my own I have previously 
expressed my regret. The predecessors of an 
original Genius of a high order will have smoothed 
the way for all that he has in common with them ; 
— and much he will have in common ; but, for 
what is peculiarly his own, he will be called upon 
to clear and often to shape his own road : — he 
will be m the condition of Hannibal among the Alps. 
And where lies the real difficulty of creating 
that taste by which a truly original poet is to be 
relished ? Is it in breaking the bonds of custom, 
in overcoming the prejudices of false refinement, 
and displacing the aversions of inexperience ? Or, 
if he labour for an object which here and else- 
where I have proposed to myself, does it consist 
in divesting the reader of the pride that induces 
him to dwell upon those points wherein men differ 
from each other, to the exclusion of those in which 
all men are alike, or the same ; and in making 
him ashamed of the vanity that renders him 
insensible of the appropriate excellence which 
civil arrangements, less unjust than might appear, 
and Nature illimitable in her bounty, have con- 
ferred on men who may stand below him in the 
scale of society ? Finally, does it lie in establishing 
that dominion over the spirits of readers by which 
they are to be humbled and humanised, in order 
that they may be purified and exalted? 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

If these ends are to be attained by the mere 
communication of knowledge, it does not He here. — 
Taste, I would remind the reader, like Imagina- 
tion, is a word which has been forced to extend its 
services far beyond the point to which philosophy 
would have confined them. It is a metaphor, taken 
from a passive sense of the human body, and 
transferred to things which are in their essence 
not passive, — to intellectual acts and operations. 
The word, Imagination, has been overstrained, 
from impulses honourable to mankind, to meet 
the demands of the faculty which is perhaps the 
noblest of our nature. In the instance of Taste, 
the process has been reversed; and from the 
prevalence of dispositions at once injurious and 
discreditable, being no other than that selfishness 
which is the child of apathy, — which, as Nations 
decline in productive and creative power, makes 
them value themselves upon a presumed refine- 
ment of judging. Poverty of language is the 
primary cause of the use which we make of 
the word, Imagination ; but the word, Taste, has 
been stretched to the sense which it bears in 
modern Europe by habits of self-conceit, inducing 
that inversion in the order of things whereby a 
passive faculty is made paramount among the facul- 
ties conversant with the fine arts. Proportion and 
congruity, the requisite knowledge being supposed, 
are subjects upon which taste may be trusted ; it is 
competent to this office; — for in its intercourse with 
these the mind is passive, and is affected painfully 
or pleasurably as by an instinct. But the profound 
and the exquisite in feeling, the lofty and universal 
in thought and imagination ; or, in ordinary lan- 
guage, the pathetic and the sublime ;- — are neither 
of them, accurately speaking, objects of a faculty 
which could ever without a sinking in the spirit 
of Nations have been designated by the metaphor 
— Taste. And why ? Because without the exer- 
tion of a co-operating power in the mind of the 
Reader, there can be no adequate sympathy with 
either of these emotions : without this auxiliary 
impulse, elevated or profound passion cannot exist. 
Passion, it must be observed, is derived from a 
word which signifies suffering; but the connec- 
tion which suffering has with effort, with exertion, 
and action, is immediate and inseparable. How 
strikingly is this property of human nature exhi- 
bited by the fact, that, in popular language, to be 
in a passion, is to be angry ! — But, 
' Anger in hasty words or blows 
Itself discharges on its foes.' 
To be moved, then, by a passion, is to be excited, 

often to external, and always to internal, effort ; 
whether for the continuance and strengthening of 
the passion, or for its suppression, accordingly as 
the course which it takes may be painful or plea- 
surable. If the latter, the soul must contribute to 
its support, or it never becomes vivid, — and soon 
languishes, and dies. And this brings us to the 
point. If every great poet with whose writings 
men are familiar, in the highest exercise of his 
genius, before he can be thoroughly enjoyed, has 
to call forth and to communicate power, this ser- 
vice, in a still greater degree, falls upon an original 
writer, at his first appearance in the world. — Of 
genius the only proof is, the act of doing well what 
is worthy to be done, and what was never done 
before : Of genius, in the fine arts, the only infallible 
sign is the widening the sphere of human sensibility, 
for the delight, honour, and benefit of human 
nature. Genius is the introduction of a new ele- 
ment into the intellectual universe : or, if that be 
not allowed, it is the application of powers to 
objects on which they had not before been exer- 
cised, or the employment of them in such a manner 
as to produce effects hitherto unknown. What is 
all this but an advance, or a conquest, made by 
the soul of the poet? Is it to be supposed that 
the reader can make progress of this kind, like 
an Indian prince or general — stretched on his 
palanquin, and borne by his slaves? No; he is 
invigorated and inspirited by his leader, in order 
that he may exert himself; for he cannot pro- 
ceed in quiescence, he cannot be carried like a 
dead weight. Therefore to create taste is to 
call forth and bestow power, of which knowledge 
is the effect ; and there lies the true difficulty. 
As the pathetic participates of an animal sensa- 
tion, it might seem — that, if the springs of this 
emotion were genuine, all men, possessed of com- 
petent knowledge of the facts and circumstances, 
would be instantaneously affected. And, doubt- 
less, in the works of every true poet will be 
found passages of that species of excellence, 
which is proved by effects immediate and uni- 
versal. But there are emotions of the pathetic 
that are simple and direct, and others — that are 
complex and revolutionary; some — to which the 
heart yields with gentleness ; others — against which 
it struggles with pride; these varieties are infinite 
as the combinations of circumstance and the con- 
stitutions of character. Remember, also, that the 
medium through which, in poetry, the heart is 
to be affected — is language; a thing subject to 
endless fluctuations and arbitrary associations. 
The genius of the poet melts these down for 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

hispurpose; buttheyretaintheir shape and quality 
to him who is not capable of exerting, within his 
own mind, a corresponding energy. There is also 
a meditative, as well as a human, pathos ; an en- 
thusiastic, as well as an ordinary, sorrow; a sadness 
that has its seat in the depths of reason, to which 
the mind cannot sink gently of itself — but to which 
it must descend. by treading the steps of thought. 
And for the sublime, — if we consider what are the 
cares that occupy the passing day, and how remote 
is the practice and the course of life from the sources 
of sublimity in the soul of Man, can it be wondered 
that there is little existing preparation for a poet 
charged with a new mission to extend its kingdom, 
and to augment and spread its enjoyments'? 
Away, then, with the senseless iteration of the 
word popular, applied to new works in poetry, as 
if there were no test of excellence in this first of 
the fine arts but that all men should run after its 
productions, as if urged by an appetite, or con- 
strained by a spell ! — The qualities of writing best 
fitted for eager reception are either such as startle 
the world into attention by their audacity and 
extravagance ; or they are chiefly of a superficial 
kind lying upon the surfaces of manners; or 
arising out of a selection and arrangement of inci- 
dents, by which the mind is kept upon the stretch 
of curiosity and the fancy amused without the 
trouble of thought. But in every thing which is 
to send the soul into herself, to be admonished 
of her weakness, or to be made conscious of her 
power : — wherever life and nature are described 
as operated upon by the creative or abstracting 
virtue of the imagination ; wherever the instinc- 
tive wisdom of antiquity and her heroic passions 
uniting, in the heart of the poet, with the meditative 
wisdom of later ages, have produced that accord 
of sublimated humanity, which is at once a history 
of the remote past and a prophetic enunciation of 
the remotest future, there, the poet must reconcile 
himself for a season to few and scattered hearers. 
— Grand thoughts (and Shakspeare must often 
have sighed over this truth), as they are most 
naturally and most fitly conceived in solitude, so 
can they not be brought forth in the midst of 
plaudits, without some violation of their sanctity. 
Go to a silent exhibition of the productions of the 
Sister Art, and be convinced that the qualities 
which dazzle at first sight, and kindle the admi- 
ration of the multitude, are essentially different 
from those by which permanent influence is 
secured. Let us not shrink from following up 
these principles as far as they will carry us, and 
conclude with observing — that there never has 

been a period, and perhaps never will be, in which 
vicious poetry, of some kind or other, has not 
excited more zealous admiration, and been far 
more generally read, than good ; but this advan- 
tage attends the good, that the individual, as well 
as the species, survives from age to age ; whereas, 
of the depraved, though the species be immortal, 
the individual quickly perishes ; the object of pre- 
sent admiration vanishes, being supplanted by 
some other as easily produced ; which, though no 
better, brings with it at least the irritation of 
novelty, — with adaptation, more or less skilful, to 
the changing humours of the majority of those wji 
are most at leisure to regard poetical works when 
they first solicit their attention. 
Is it the result of the whole, that, in the opinion 
of the Writer, the judgment of the People is not 
to be respected ? The thought is most injurious ; 
and, cculd the charge be brought against him, he 
would repel it with indignation. The People have 
already been justified, and their eulogium pro- 
nounced by implication, when it was said, above — 
that, of good poetry, the individual, as well as the 
species, survives. And how does it survive but 
through the People ? What preserves it but their 
intellect and their wisdom  
' Past and future, are the wings 
On whose support, harmoniously conjoined, 
Moves the great Spirit of human knowledge 
MS. 
The voice that issues from this Spirit, is that Vox 
Populi which the Deity inspires. Foolish must he 
be who can mistake for this a local acclamation, or 
a transitory outcry — transitory though it be for 
years, local though from a Nation. Still more 
lamentable is his error who can believe that thex'e 
is any thing of divine infallibility in the clamour 
of that small though loud portion of the community, 
ever governed by factitious influence, which, under 
the name of the Public, passes itself, upon the 
unthinking, for the People. Towards the Public, 
the Writer hopes that he feels as much deference 
as it is entitled to: but to the People, philoso- 
phically characterised, and to the embodied spirit 
of their knowledge, so far as it exists and moves, 
at the present, faithfully supported by its two wings, 
the past and the future, his devout respect, his 
reverence, is due. He offers it willingly and readily ; 
and, this done, takes leave of his Readers, by 
assuring them — that, if he were not persuaded that 
the contents of these Volumes, and the Work to 
which they are subsidiary, evince something of the 
' Vision and the Faculty divine ;' and that, both in 
words and things, they will operate in their degree, 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

to extend the domain of sensibility for the delight, 
the honour, and the benefit of human nature, not- 
withstanding the many happy hours which he has 
employed in their composition, and the manifold 
comforts and enjoyments they have procured to 

him, he would not, if a wish could do it, save them 
from immediate destruction ; — from becoming at 
this moment, to the world, as a tiling that had 
never been. 
. 



DEDICATION. 
PREFIXED TO THE EDITION OF . 

SIR GEORGE HOWLAND BEAUMONT, BART. 

My dear Sir George, 
Accept my thanks for the permission given 
me to dedicate these Volumes to you. In addi- 
tion to a lively pleasure derived from general con. 
siderations, I feel a particular satisfaction ; for, by 
inscribing these Poems with your Name, I seem to 
myself in some degree to repay, by an appropriate 
honour, the great obligation which I owe to one 
part of the Collection— as having been the means 
of first making us personally known to each other. 
Upon much of the remainder, also, you have a 
peculiar claim, — for some of the best pieces were 
composed under the shade of your own groves, 
upon the classic ground of Coleorton; where I 
was animated by the recollection of those illustri- 
ous Poets of your name and family, who were bom 
in that neighbourhood ; and, we may be assured, 
did not wander with indifference by the dashing 
stream of Grace Dieu, and among the rocks that 
diversify the forest of Charnwood. — Nor is there 

any one to whom such parts of this Collection as 
have been inspired or coloured by the beautiful 
Country from winch I now address you, could be 
presented with more propriety th°n to yourself — ■ 
to whom it has suggested so many admirable pic- 
tures Early in life, the sublimity and beau ty of 
this region excited your admiration ; and I know 
that you are bound to it in mind by a still strength- 
ening attachment. 
Wishing and hoping that this Work, with the 
embellishments it has received from your pencil 
may survive as a lasting memorial of a friendship, 
which I reckon among the blessings of my life, 
I have the honour to be, 
My dear Sir George, 
Yours most affectionately and faithfully, 
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH. 
Rydal Moctnt, Westmoreland, 
February , . 

PREFACE TO THE EDITION OF . 

The powers requisite for the production of 
poetry are : first, those of Observation and De- 
scription, — i. e., the ability to observe with accuracy 
things as they are in themselves, and with fidelity 
to describe them, unmodified by any passion or 
feeling existing in the mind of the describer: 
whether the things depicted be actually present 
to the senses, or have a place only in the memory. 

This power, though indispensable to a Poet, is 
one which he employs only in submission to 
necessity, and never for a continuance of tine: 
as its exercise supposes all the higher qualities 
of the mind to be passive, and in a state of sub- 

 The state of the plates has, for some time, not allowed 
them to be repeated. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

jection to external objects, much in the same 
way as a translator or engraver ought to be 
to his original. ndly, Sensibility, — which, the 
more exquisite it is, the wider will be the range 
of a poet's perceptions ; and the more will he be 
incited to observe objects, both as they exist in 
themselves and as re-acted upon by his own 
mind. (The distinction between poetic and human 
sensibility has been marked in the character of 
the Poet delineated in the original preface.) dly, 
Reflection, — which makes the Poet acquainted 
with the value of actions, images, thoughts, and 
feelings ; and assists the sensibility in perceiving 
their connection with each other. thly, Imagina- 
tion and Fancy, — to modify, to create, and to 
associate. Sthly, Invention, — by which characters 
are composed out of materials supplied by ob- 
servation ; whether of the Poet's own heart and 
miud. or of external life and nature ; and 
su-?h incidents and situations produced as are 
most impressive to the imagination, and most 
fitted to do justice to the characters, sentiments, 
and passions, which the Poet undertakes to 
illustrate. And, lastly, Judgment, — to decide 
now and where, and in what degree, each of 
these faculties ought to be exerted ; so that the 
less shall not be sacrificed to the greater ; nor the 
greater, slighting the less, arrogate, to its own 
injury, more than its due. By judgment, also, is 
determined what are the laws and appropriate 
graces of every species of composition. 
The materials of Poetry, by these powers col- 
lected and produced, are cast, by means of various 
moulds, into divers forms. The moulds may be 
enumerated, and the forms specified, in the follow- 
ing order. st, The Narrative, — including the 
Epopoeia, the Historic Poem, the Tale, the Ro- 
mance, the Mock-heroic, and, if the spirit of 
Homer will tolerate such neighbourhood, that dear 
production of our days, the metrical Novel. Of 
this Class, the distinguishing mark is, that the 
Narrator, however liberally his speaking agents be 
introduced, is himself the source from which every 
thing primarily flows. Epic Poets, in order that 
their mode of composition may accord with the 
elevation of their subject, represent themselves as 
singing from the inspiration of the Muse, ' Arma 
virumque cano;' but this is a fiction, in modern 
times, of slight value : the Iliad or the Paradise 

 As sensibility to harmony of numbers, and the power 
of producing it, ate invariably attendants upon the facul- 
tits above specified, nothing has been said upon thos<s 
requisites. 

Lost would gain little in our estimation by being 
chanted. The other poets who belong to this class 
are commonly content to tell their tale ;— so that 
of the whole it may be affirmed that they neither 
require nor reject the accompaniment of music. 
ndly, The Dramatic, — consisting of Tragedy, 
Historic Drama, Comedy, and Masque, in which 
the poet does not appear at all in his own person, 
and where the whole action is carried on by speech 
and dialogue of the agents ; music being admitted 
only incidentally and rarely. The Opera may be 
placed here, inasmuch as it proceeds by dialogue ; 
though depending, to the degree that it does, upon 
music, it has a strong claim to be ranked with 
the lyrical. The characteristic and impassioned 
Epistle, of which Ovid and Pope have given 
examples, considered as a species of monodrama, 
may, without impropriety, be placed in this class. 
rdly, The Lyrical, — containing the Hymn, the 
Ode, the Elegy, the Song, and the Ballad ; in all 
which, for the production of their full effect, an 
accompaniment of music is indispensable. 
thly, The Idyllium, — descriptive chiefly either 
of the processes and appearances of external 
nature, as the Seasons of Thomson ; or of cha- 
racters, manners, and sentiments, as are Shen- 
stone's Schoolmistress, The Cotter's Saturday 
Night of Burns, The Twa Dogs of the same 
Author; or of these in conjunction with the 
appearances of Nature, as most of the pieces of 
Theocritus, the Allegro and Penseroso of Milton, 
Beattie's Minstrel, Goldsmith's Deserted Village. 
The Epitaph, the Inscription, the Sonnet, most of 
the epistles of poets writing in their own persons, 
and all loco-descriptive poetry, belong to this class 
thly, Didactic, — the principal object of which 
is direct instruction ; as the Poem of Lucretius, 
the Georgics of Virgil, The Fleece of Dyer, 
Mason's English Garden, &c. 
And, lastly, philosophical Satire, like that of 
Horace and Juvenal ; personal and occasional 
Satire rarely comprehending sufficient of the 
general in the individual to be dignified with the 
name of poetry. 
Out of the three last has been constructed 
a composite order, of which Young's Night 
Thoughts, and Cowper's Task, are excellent 
examples. 
It is deducible from the above, that poems, 
apparently miscellaneous, may with propriety be 
arranged either with reference to the powers of 
miud predominant in the production of them ; or 
to the mould in which they are cast ; or, lastly, 
to the subjects to which they relate. From each 
J xx 

b' 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

of these considerations, the following Poems have 
been divided into classes; which, that the work 
may more obviously correspond with the course of 
human life, and for the sake of exhibiting in it the 
three requisites of a legitimate whole, a beginning, 
a middle, and an end, have been also arranged, as 
far as it was possible, according to an order of 
time, commencing with Childhood, and terminat- 
ing with Old Age, Death, and Immortality. My 
guiding wish was, that the small pieces of which 
these volumes consist, thus discriminated, might 
be regarded under a two-fold view ; as composing 
an entire work within themselves, and as adjuncts 
to the philosophical Poem, " The Recluse." This 
arrangement has long presented itself habitually 
to my own mind. Nevertheless, I should have 
preferred to scatter the contents of these volumes 
at random, if I had been persuaded that, by the 
plan adopted, any thing material would be taken 
from the natural effect of the pieces, individually, 
on the mind of the unreflecting Reader. I trust 
there is a sufficient variety in each class to prevent 
this; while, for him who reads with reflection, 
the arrangement will serve as a commentary unos- 
tentatiously directing his attention to my purposes, 
both particular and general. But, as I wish to 
guard against the possibility of misleading by this 
classification, it is proper first to remind the Reader, 
that certain poems are placed according to the 
powers of mind, in the Author's conception, 
predominant in the production of them ; predomi- 
nant, which implies the exertion of other faculties 
in less degree. Where there is more imagination 
than fancy in a poem, it is placed under the head 
of imagination, and vice versa. Both the above 
classes might without impropriety have been 
enlarged from that consisting of " Poems founded 
on the Affections ; " as might this latter from 
those, and from the class "proceeding from 
Sentiment and Reflection." The most striking 
characteristics of each piece, mutual illustration, 
variety, and proportion, have governed me 
throughout. 
None of the other Classes, except those of 
Fancy and Imagination, require any particular 
notice. But a remark of general application may 
be made. All Poets, except the dramatic, have 
been in the practice of feigning that their works 
were composed to the music of the harp or lyre : 
with what degree of affectation this has been 
done in modern times, I leave to the judicious to 
determine. For my own part, I have not been 
disposed to violate probability so far, or to make 
such a large demand upon the Reader's charity. 

Some of these pieces are essentially lyrical ; and, 
therefore, cannot have their due force without a 
supposed musical accompaniment ; but, in much 
the greatest part, as a substitute for the classic 
lyre or romantic harp, I require nothing more 
than an animated or impassioned recitation, 
adapted to the subject. Poems, however humble 
in their kind, if they be good in that kind, cannot 
read themselves ; the law of long syllable and 
short must not be so inflexible, — the letter of 
metre must not be so impassive to the spirit of 
versification, — as to deprive the Reader of all 
voluntary power to modulate, in subordination to 
the sense, the music of the poem ; — in the same 
manner as his mind is left at liberty, and even 
summoned, to act upon its thoughts and images. 
But, though the accompaniment of a musical 
instrument be frequently dispensed with, the true 
Poet does not therefore abandon his privilege 
distinct from that of the mere Proseman ; 
' He murmurs near the running brooks 
A music sweeter than their own.' 
Let us come now to the consideration of the words 
Fancy and Imagination, as employed in the classifi- 
cation of the following Poems. ' A man,' says an 
intelligent author, ' has imagination in proportion 
as he can distinctly copy in idea the impressions of 
sense : it is the faculty which images within the 
mind the phenomena of sensation. A man has fancy 
in proportion as he can call up, connect, or asso- 
ciate, at pleasure, those internal images ((pavrd^iv 
is to cause to appear) so as to complete ideal 
representations of absent objects. Imagination is 
the power of depicting, and fancy of evoking and 
combining. The imagination is formed by patient 
observation; the fancy by a voluntary activity 
in shifting the scenery of the mind. The more 
accurate the imagination, the more safely may a 
painter, or a poet, undertake a delineation, or a 
description, without the presence of the objects 
to be characterised. The more versatile the 
fancy, the more original and striking will be the 
decorations produced.' — British Synonyms dis- 
criminated, by W. Taylor. 
Is not this as if a man should undertake to supply 
an account of a building, and be so intent upon 
what he had discovered of the foundation, as to 
conclude his task without once looking up at the 
superstructure] Here, as in other instances 
throughout the volume, the judicious Author's 
mind is enthralled by Etymology ; he takes up the 
original word as his guide and escort, and too often 
does not perceive how soon he becomes its prisoner. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

without liberty to tread in any path but that to 
which it confines him. It is not easy to find out 
how imagination, thus explained, differs from 
distinct remembrance of images ; or fancy from 
quick and vivid recollection of them : each is 
nothing more than a mode of memory. If the two 
words bear the above meaning, and no other, what 
term is left to designate that faculty of which the 
Poet is ' all compact ;' he whose eye glances from 
earth to heaven, whose spiritual attributes body 
forth what his pen is prompt in turning to shape ; 
or what is left to characterise Fancy, as insinuating 
herself into the heart of objects with creative 
activity? — Imagination, in the sense of the word 
as giving title to a class of the following Poems, 
has no reference to images that are merely a faith- 
ful copy, existing in the mind, of absent external 
objects ; but is a word of higher import, denoting 
operations of the mind upon those objects, and 
processes of creation or of composition, governed 
by certain fixed laws. I proceed to illustrate my 
meaning by instances. A parrot hangs from the 
wires of his cage by bis beak or by his claws ; or 
a monkey from the bough of a tree by his paws or 
his tail. Each creature does so literally and 
actually. In the first Eclogue of Virgil, the shep- 
herd, thinking of the time when he is to take leave 
of his farm, thus addresses his goats : — 
' Non ego vos posthac viridi projectus in antro 
Dumosa pendere procul de rupe videbo.' 
 half way down 

Hangs one who gathers samphire,' 
is the well-known expression of Shakspeare, de- 
lineating an ordinary image upon the cliffs of 
Dover. In these two instances is a slight exer- 
tion of the faculty which I denominate imagination, 
in the use of one word : neither the goats nor the 
samphire-gatherer do literally hang, as does the 
parrot or the monkey ; but, presenting to the 
senses something of such an appearance, the mind 
in its activity, for its own gratification, contemplates 
them as hanging. 
' As when far off at sea a fleet descried 
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds 
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles 
Of Ternate or Tidore, whence merchants bring 
Their spicy drugs ; they on the trading flood 
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape 
Ply, stemming nightly toward the Pole ; so seemed 
Par off the flying Fiend.' 
Here is the full strength of the imagination 
involved in the word hangs, and exerted upon the 
whole image : First, the fleet, an aggregate of 

many ships, is represented as one mighty person, 
whose track, we know and feel, is upon the waters ; 
but, taking advantage of its appearance to the 
senses, the Poet dares to represent it as hanging in 
the clouds, both for the gratification of the mind in 
contemplating the image itself, and in reference to 
the motion and appearance of the sublime objects 
to which it is compared. 
From impressions of sight we will pass to those 
of sound ; which, as they must necessarily be of a 
less definite character, shall be selected from these 
volumes : 
' Over his own sweet voice the Stock- dove broods , ' 
of the same bird, 
' His voice was buried among trees, 
Yet to be come at by the breeze ;' 
' O, Cuckoo ! shall I call thee Bird, 
Or but a wandering Voice ? ' 
The stock-dove is said to coo, a sound well 
imitating the note of the bird ; but, by the inter- 
vention of the metaphor broods, the affections are 
called in by the imagination to assist in marking 
the manner in which the bird reiterates and pro- 
longs her soft note, as if herself delighting to listen 
to it, and participating of a still and quiet satisfac- 
tion, like that which may be supposed inseparable 
from the continuous process of incubation. ' His 
voice was buried among trees,' a metaphor express- 
ing the love of seclusion by which this Bird is 
marked ; and characterising its note as not par- 
taking of the shrill and the piercing, and therefore 
more easily deadened by the intervening shade ; 
yet a note so peculiar and withal so pleasing, that 
the breeze, gifted with that love of the sound which 
the Poet feels, penetrates the shades in which it is 
entombed, and conveys it to the ear of the listener. 
' Shall I call thee Bird, 
Or but a wandering Voice ? 
This concise interrogation characterises the 
seeming ubiquity of the voice of the cuckoo, and 
dispossesses the creature almost of a corporeal 
existence ; the Imagination being tempted to this 
exertion of her power by a consciousness in the 
memory that the cuckoo is almost perpetually 
heard throughout the season of spring, but seldom 
becomes an object of sight. 
Thus far of images independent of each other, 
and immediately endowed by the mind with pro- 
perties that do not inhere in them, upon an incite- 
ment from properties and qualities the existence of 
which is inherent and obvious. These processes of 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

imagination- are carried on either by conferring 
additional properties upon an object, or abstracting 
from it some of those which it actually possesses, 
and thus enabling it to re-act upon the mind which 
hath performed the process, like a new existence. 
I pass from the Imagination acting upon an 
individual image to a consideration of the same 
faculty employed upon images in a conjunction by 
which they modify each other. The Reader has 
already had a fine instance before him in the pas- 
sage quoted from Virgil, where the apparently 
perilous situation of the goat, hanging upon the 
shaggy precipice, is contrasted with that of the 
shepherd contemplating it from the seclusion of 
the cavern in which he lies stretched at ease and 
in security. Take these images separately, and 
how unaffecting the picture compared with that 
produced by their being thus connected with, and 
opposed to, each other ! 
• As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie 
Couched on the bald top of an eminence. 
Wonder to all who do the same espy- 
By what means it could thither come, and whence, 
So that it seems a thing endued with sense, 
Like a sea-beast crawled forth, which on a shelf 
Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun himself. 
Such seemed this Man ; not all alive or dead 
Nor all asleep, in his extreme old age. 
  # 
Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, 
That heareth not the loud winds when they call, 
And moveth altogether if it move at all.' 
In these images, the conferring, the abstracting, 
and the modifying powers of the Imagination, 
immediately and mediately acting, are all brought 
into conjunction. The stone is endowed with 
something of the power of life to approximate it 
to the sea-beast ; and the sea-beast stripped of 
some of its vital qualities to assimilate it to the 
stone ; which intermediate image is thus treated 
for the purpose of bringing the original image, 
that of the stone, to a nearer resemblance to 
the figure and condition of the aged Man ; who 
is divested of so much of the indications of life 
and motion as to bring him to the point where 
the two objects unite and coalesce in just com- 
parison. After what has been said, the image of 
the cloud need not be commented upon. 
Thus far of an endowing or modifying power : 
but the Imagination also shapes and creates; and 
how  By innumerable processes ; and in none 
does it more delight than in that of consolidating 
numbers into unity, and dissolving and separating 
unity into number,— alternations proceeding from, 

and governed by, a sublime consciousness of the 
soul in her own mighty and almost divine powers. 
Recur to the passage already cited from Milton. 
When the compact Fleet, as one Person, has been 
introduced ' Sailing from Bengala.' They,' i. e. 
the 'merchants,' representing the fleet resolved 
into a multitude of ships, 'ply' their voyage 
towards the extremities of the earth : ' So ' (refer- 
ring to the word ' As ' in the commencement) 
' seemed the flying Fiend ; ' the image of his 
Person acting to recombine the multitude of 
ships into one body, — the point from which the 
comparison set out. ' So seemed,' and to whom 
seemed ] To the heavenly Muse who dictates 
the poem, to the eye of the Poet's mind, and 
to that of the Reader, present at one moment 
in the wide Ethiopian, and the next in the soli- 
tudes, then first broken in upon, of the infernal 
regions ! 
' Modo me Thebis, modo ponit Athsni.' 
Hear again this mighty Poet, — speaking of the 
Messiah going forth to expel from heaven the 
rebellious angels, 
' Attended by ten thousand thousand Saints 
He onward came : far off his coming shone,' — 
the retinue of Saints, and the Person of the 
Messiah himself, lost almost and merged in the 
splendour of that indefinite abstraction ' His 
coming !' 
As I do not mean here to treat this subject 
further than to throw some light upon the pre- 
sent Volumes, and especially upon one division of 
them, I shall spare myself and the Reader the 
trouble of considering the Imagination as it deals 
with thoughts and sentiments, as it regulates the 
composition of characters, and determines the 
course of actions : I will not consider it (more 
than I have already done by implication) as that 
power which, in the language of one of my most 
esteemed Friends, 'draws all things to one; which 
makes things animate or inanimate, beings with 
their attributes, subjects with their accessaries, 
take one colour and serve to one effect.' The 
grand store-houses of enthusiastic and meditative 
Imagination, of poetical, as contradistinguished 
from human and dramatic Imagination, are the 
prophetic and lyrical parts of the Holy Scriptures, 
and the works of Milton ; to which I cannot forbear 
to add those of Spenser. I select these writers in 
preference to those of ancient Greece and Rome, 

 Charles Lamb upon the genius of Hogarth. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

because the anthropomorphitism of the Pagan reli- 
gion subj ected the minds of the greatest poets in those 
countries too much to the bondage of definite form ; 
from which the Hebrews were preserved by their 
abhorrence of idolatry. This abhorrence was almost 
as strong in our great epic Poet, both from cir- 
cumstances of his life, and from the constitution 
of his mind. However imbued the surface might 
be with classical literature, he was a Hebrew in 
soul ; and all things tended in him towards the 
sublime. Spenser, of a gentler nature, maintained 
his freedom by aid of his allegorical spirit, at one 
time inciting him to create persons out of abstrac- 
tions; and, at another, by a superior effort of genius, 
to give the universality and permanence of abstrac- 
tions to his human beings, by means of attributes 
and emblems that belong to the highest moral 
truths and the purest sensations, — of which his 
character of Una is a glorious example. Of the 
human and dramatic Imagination the works of 
Shakspeare are an inexhaustible source. 
' I tax not you, ye Elements, with unkindness, 
I never gave you kingdoms, call'd you Daughters ! ' 
And if, bearing in mind the many Poets distin- 
guished by this prime quality, whose names I 
omit to mention ; yet justified by recollection 
of the insults which the ignorant, the incapable, 
and the presumptuous, have heaped upon these 
and my other writings, I may be permitted to 
anticipate the judgment of posterity upon myself, I 
shall declare (censurable, I grant, if the notoriety 
of the fact above stated does not justify me) that I 
have given in these unfavourable times, evidence 
of exertions of this faculty upon its worthiest 
objects, the external universe, the moral and reli- 
gious sentiments of Man, his natural affections, 
and his acquired passions ; which have the same 
ennobling tendency as the productions of men, in 
this kind, worthy to be holden in undying remem- 
brance. 
To the mode in which Fancy has already been 
characterised as the power of evoking and com- 
bining, or, as my friend Mr. Coleridge has styled 
it, ' the aggregative and associative power,' my 
objection is only that the definition is too general. 
To aggregate and to associate, to evoke and to 
combine, belong as well to the Imagination as 
to the Fancy ; but either the materials evoked 
and combined are different ; or they are brought 
together under a different law, and for a different 
purpose. Fancy does not require that the mate- 
rials which she makes use of should be susceptible 
of change in their constitution, from her touch ; 

and, where they admit of modification, it is 
enough for her purpose if it be slight, limited, 
and evanescent. Directly the reverse of these, 
are the desires and demands of the Imagination. 
She recoils from every thing but the plastic, the 
pliant, and the indefinite. She leaves it to Fancy 
to describe Queen Mab as coming, 
' In shape no bigger than an agate-stone 
On the fore-finger of an alderman.' 
Having to speak of stature, she does not tell 
you that her gigantic Angel was as tall as Pom- 
pey's Pillar ; much less that he was twelve cubits, 
or twelve hundred cubits high ; or that his dimen- 
sions equalled those of Teneriffe or Atlas; — 
because these, and if they were a million times 
as high it would be the same, are bounded : The 
expression is, '■ His stature reached the sky ! ' 
the illimitable firmament ! — When the Imagina- 
tion frames a comparison, if it does not strike 
on the first presentation, a sense of the truth of 
the likeness, from the moment that it is perceived, 
grows — and continues to grow — upon the mind ; 
the resemblance depending less upon outline of 
form and feature, than upon expression and effect ; 
less upon casual and outstanding, than upon inhe- 
rent and internal, properties : moreover, the images 
invariably modify each other. — The law under 
which the processes of Fancy are carried on is 
as capricious as the accidents of things, and the 
effects are surprising, playful, ludicrous, amusing, 
tender, or pathetic, as the objects happen to be appo- 
sitely produced or fortunately combined. Fancy 
depends upon the rapidity and profusion with 
which she scatters her thoughts and images ; trust- 
ing that their number, and the felicity with 
which they are linked together, will make amends 
for the want of individual value : or she prides 
herself upon the curious subtilty and the suc- 
cessful elaboration with which she can detect 
their lurking affinities. If she can win you over 
to her purpose, and impart to you her feelings, 
she cares not how unstable or transitory may be 
her influence, knowing that it will not be out of 
her power to resume it upon an apt occasion. 
But the Imagination is conscious of an indestruct- 
ible dominion ; — the Soul may fall away from it, 
not being able to sustain its grandeur; but, if 
once felt and acknowledged, by no act of any 
other faculty of the mind can it be relaxed, im- 
paired, or diminished. — Fancy is given to quicken 
and to beguile the temporal part of our nature, 
Imagination to incite and to support the eternal. — 
Yet is it not the less true that Fancy, as she is an 

L_ 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

active, is also, under her own laws and in her own 
spirit, a creative faculty. In what manner Fancy 
ambitiously aims at a rivalship with Imagination, 
and Imagination stoops to work with the materials 
of Fancy, might be illustrated from the compo- 
sitions of all eloquent writers, whether in prose 
or verse ; and chiefly from those of our own 
Country. Scarcely a page of the impassioned 
parts of Bishop Taylor's Works can be opened 
that shall not afford examples. — Referring the 
Reader to those inestimable volumes, I will con- 
tent myself with placing a conceit (ascribed to 
Lord Chesterfield) in contrast with a passage 
from the Paradise Lost : — 
' The dews of the evening most carefully shun, 
They are the tears of the sky for the loss of the sun. 
After the transgression of Adam, Milton, with 
other appearances of sympathising Nature, thus 
marks the immediate consequence, 
' Sky lowered, and, muttering thunder, some sad drops 
Wept at completion of the mortal sin.' 
The associating link is the same in each instance : 
Dew and rain, not distinguishable from the liquid 
substance of tears, are employed as indications of 
sorrow. A flash of surprise is the effect in the 
former case ; a flash of surprise, and nothing more ; 
for the nature of things does not sustain the com- 
bination. In the latter, the effects from the act, 
of which there is this immediate consequence and 
visible sign, are so momentous, that the mind 
acknowledges the justice and reasonableness of the 
sympathy in nature so manifested; and the sky 
weeps drops of water as if with human eyes, as 
' Earth had before trembled from her entrails, 
and Nature given a second groan.' 
Finally, I will refer to Cotton's "Ode upon 
Winter," an admirable composition, though stained 
with some peculiarities of the age in which he 
lived, for a general illustration of the charac- 
teristics of Fancy. The middle part of this ode 
contains a most lively description of the entrance 
of Winter, with his retinue, as 'A palsied king,' 
and yet a military monarch, — advancing for con- 
quest with his army ; the several bodies of which, 
and their arms and equipments, are described with 
a rapidity of detail, and a profusion of fanciful 
comparisons, which indicate on the part of the 
poet extreme activity of intellect, and a corre- 
spondent hurry of delightful feeling. Winter 
retires from the foe into his fortress, where 

. a magazine 

Of sovereign juice is cellared in ; 
Liquor that will the siege maintain 
Should Phoebus ne'er return again.' 

Though myself a water-drinker I cannot resist 
the pleasure of transcribing what follows, as an 
instance still more happy of Fancy employed in 
the treatment of feeling than, in its preceding 
passages, the Poem supplies of her management 
of forms. 
' Tis that, that gives the poet rage, 
And thaws the gelly'd blood of age ; 
Matures the young, restores the old, 
And makes the fainting coward hold. 
It lays the careful head to rest, 
Calms palpitations in the breast, 
Renders our lives' misfortune sweet ; 
 
Then let the chill Sirocco blow, 
And gird us round with hills of snow, 
Or else go whistle to the shore, 
And make the hollow mountains roar, 
Whilst we together jovial sit 
Careless, and crowned with mirth and wit, 
Where, though bleak winds confine us home. 
Our fancies round the world shall roam. 
We ' think of all the Friends we know, 
And drink to all worth drinking to ; 
When having drunk all thine and mine, 
We rather shall want healths than wine. 
But where Friends fail us, we ' supply 
Our friendships with our charity ; 
Men that remote in sorrows live, 
Shall by our lusty brimmers thrive. 
We ' drink the wanting into wealth, 
And those that languish into health, 
The afflicted into joy ; th'opprest 
Into security and rest. 
The worthy in disgrace shall find 
Favour return again more kind, 
And in restraint who stifled lie, 
Shall taste the air of liberty. 
The brave shall triumph in success, 
The lovers shall have mistresses, 
Poor unregarded Virtue, praise, 
And the neglected Poet, bays. 
Thus shall our healths do others good, 
Whilst we ourselves do all we would ; 
For, freed from envy and from care, 
What would we be but what we are ? ' 
When I sate down to write this Preface, it was 
my intention to have made it more comprehensive ; 
but, thinking that I ought rather to apologise for 
detaining the reader so long, I will here conclude. 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

POSTSCRIPT. 
. 

In the present volume, as in those that have pre- 
ceded it, the reader will have found occasionally 
opinions expressed upon the course of public affairs, 
and feelings given vent to as national interests ex- 
cited them. Since nothing, I trust, has been 
uttered but in the spirit of reflective patriotism, 
those notices are left to produce their own effect ; 
but, among the many objects of general concern, and 
the changes going forward, which I have glanced 
at in verse, are some especially affecting the lower 
orders of society : in reference to these, I wish 
here to add a few words in plain prose. 
Were I conscious of being able to do justice to 
those important topics, I might avail myself of 
the periodical press for offering anonymously my 
thoughts, such as they are, to the world ; but I 
feel that, in procuring attention, they may derive 
some advantage, however small, from my name, in 
addition to that of being presented in a less fugitive 
shape. It is also not impossible that the state of 
mind which some of the foregoing poems may have 
produced in the reader, will dispose him to receive 
more readily the impression which I desire to 
make, and to admit the conclusions I would esta- 
blish. 
I. The first thing that presses upon my attention 
is the Poor-Law Amendment Act. I am aware of 
the magnitude and complexity of the subject, and 
the unwearied attention which it has received from 
men of far wider experience than my own ; yet I 
cannot forbear touching upon one point of it, and 
to this I will confine myself, though not insensible 
to the objection which may reasonably be brought 
against treating a portion of this, or any other, 
great scheme of civil polity separately from the 
whole. The point to which I wish to draw the 
reader's attention is, that all persons who cannot 
find employment, or procure wages sufficient to 
support the body in health and strength, are 
entitled to a maintenance by law. 
This dictate of humanity is acknowledged in the 
Report of the Commissioners: but is there not 
room for apprehension that some of the regulations 
of the new act have a tendency to render the prin- 

ciple nugatory by difficulties thrown in the way of 
applying it ? If this be so, persons will not be 
wanting to show it, by examining the provisions of 
the act in detail, — an attempt which would be quite 
out of place here ; but it will not, therefore, be 
deemed unbecoming in one who fears that the 
prudence of the head may, in framing some of 
those provisions, have supplanted the wisdom of 
the heart, to enforce a principle which cannot 
be violated without infringing upon one of the 
most precious rights of the English people, and 
opposing one of the most sacred claims of civilised 
humanity. 
There can be no greater error, in this depart- 
ment of legislation, than the belief that this prin- 
ciple does by necessity operate for the degradation 
of those who claim, or are so circumstanced as 
to make it likely they may claim, through laws 
founded upon it, relief or assistance. The direct 
contrary is the truth : it may be unanswerably 
maintained that its tendency is to raise, not to de- 
press ; by stamping a value upon life, which can 
belong to it only where the laws have placed men 
who are willing to work, and yet cannot find em- 
ployment, above the necessity of looking for pro- 
tection against hunger and other natural evils, 
either to individual and casual charity, to despair 
and death, or to the breach of law by theft, or 
violence. 
And here, as in the Report of the Commissioners, 
the fundamental principle has been recognised, 
I am not at issue with them any farther than 
I am compelled to believe that their 'remedial 
measures ' obstruct the application of it more than 
the interests of society require. 
And, calling to mind the doctrines of political 
economy which are now prevalent, I cannot 
forbear to enforce the justice of the principle, and 
to insist upon its salutary operation. 
And first for its justice : If self-preservation be 
the first law of our nature, would not every one 
in a state of nature be morally justified in taking 
to himself that which is indispensable to such 
preservation, where, by so doing, he would not 
rob another of that which might be equally 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

indispensable to his preservation? And if the 
value of life be regarded in a right point of view, 
may it not be questioned whether this right of 
preserving life, at any expense short of endanger- 
ing the life of another, does not survive man's 
entering into the social state ; whether this right 
can be surrendered or forfeited, except when it 
opposes the divine law, upon any supposition of 
a social compact, or of any convention for the 
protection of mere rights of property ? 
But, if it be not safe to touch the abstract ques- 
tion of man's right in a social state to help him- 
self even in the last extremity, may we not still 
contend for the duty of a christian government, 
standing in loco parentis towards all its subjects, 
to make such effectual provision, that no one shall 
be in danger of perishing either through the 
neglect or harshness of its legislation ? Or, waiv- 
ing this, is it not indisputable that the claim of 
the state to the allegiance, involves the protection, 
of the subject? And, as all rights in one party 
impose a correlative duty upon another, it follows 
that the right of the state to require the services 
of its members, even to the jeoparding of their 
lives in the common defence, establishes a right 
in the people (not to be gainsaid by utilitarians 
and economists) to public support when, from any 
cause, they may be unable to support themselves. 
Let us now consider the salutary and benign 
operation of this principle. Here we must have 
recourse to elementary feelings of human nature, 
and to truths which from their very obviousness 
are apt to be slighted, till they are forced upon 
our notice by our own sufferings or those of others. 
In the Paradise Lost, Milton represents Adam, 
after the Fall, as exclaiming, in the anguish of 
his soul — 
' Did I request Thee, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me man ; did I solicit Thee 
From darkness to promote me ? 
My will 
Concurred not to my being.' 
Under how many various pressures of misery 
have men been driven thus, in a strain touching 
upon impiety, to expostulate with the Creator ! 
and under few so afflictive as when the source 
and origin of earthly existence have been brought 
back to the mind by its impending close in the 
pangs of destitution. But as long as, in our 
legislation, due weight shall be given to this 
principle, no man will be forced to bewail the gift 
of life in hopeless want of the necessaries of life. 
Englishmen have, therefore, by the progress 
of civilisation among them, been placed in cir- 

cumstances more favourable to piety and resigna- 
tion to the divine will, than the inhabitants of 
other countries, where a like provision has not 
been established. And as Providence, in this 
care of our countrymen, acts through a human 
medium, the objects of that care must, in like 
manner, be more inclined towards a grateful love 
of their fellow-men. Thus, also, do stronger 
ties attach the people to their country, whether 
while they tread its soil, or, at a distance, think 
of their native land as an indulgent parent, to 
whose arms, even they who have been imprudent 
and undeserving may, like the prodigal son, 
betake themselves, without fear of being rejected. 
Such is the view of the case that would first 
present itself to a reflective mind ; and it is in 
vain to show, by appeals to experience, in contrast 
with this view, that provisions founded upon the 
principle have promoted profaneness of life, and 
dispositions the reverse of philanthropic, by 
spreading idleness, selfishness, and rapacity : 
for these evils have arisen, not as an inevitable 
consequence of the principle, but for want of 
judgment in framing laws based upon it; and, 
above all, from faults in the mode of administering 
the law. The mischief that has grown to such 
a height from granting relief in cases where proper 
vigilance would have shown that it was not required, 
or in bestowing it in undue measure, will be urged 
by no truly enlightened statesman, as a sufficient 
reason for banishing the principle itself from 
legislation. 
Let us recur to the miserable states of conscious- 
ness that it precludes. 
There is a story told, by a traveller in Spain, 
of a female who, by a sudden shock of domestic 
calamity, was driven out of her senses, and ever 
after looked up incessantly to the sky, feeling that 
her fellow-creatures could do nothing for her 
relief. Can there be Englishmen who, with a 
good end in view, would, upon system, expose 
their brother Englishmen to a like necessity of 
looking upwards only ; or downwards to the earth, 
after it shall contain no spot where the destitute 
can demand, by civil right, what by right of nature 
they are entitled to ? 
Suppose the objects of our sympathy not sunk 
into this blank despair, but wandering about as 
strangers in streets and ways, with the hope of 
succour from casual charity ; what have we gained 
by such a change of scene? Woful is the con- 
dition of the famished Northern Indian, dependent, 
among winter snows, upon the chance-passage of 
a herd of deer, from which one, if brought down 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

by his riHe-gun, may be made the means of keep- 
ing him and his companions alive. As miserable 
is that of some savage Islander, who, when the 
land has ceased to afford him sustenance, watches 
for food which the waves may cast up, or in vain 
endeavours to extract it from the inexplorable 
deep. But neither of these is in a state of wretch- 
edness comparable to that, which is so often 
endured in civilised society : multitudes, in all 
ages, have known it, of whom may be said : — 
' Homeless, near a thousand homes they stood, 
And near a thousand tables pined, and wanted food.' 
Justly might I be accused of wasting time 
in an uncalled-for attempt to excite the feel- 
ings of the reader, if systems of political economy, 
widely spread, did not impugn the principle, and 
if the safeguards against such extremities were 
left unimpaired. It is broadly asserted by many, 
that every man who endeavours to find work, may 
find it : were this assertion capable of being veri- 
fied, there still would remain a question, what 
kind of work, and how far may the labourer be 
fit for it ? For if sedentary work is to be exchanged 
for standing ; and some light and nice exercise of 
the fingers, to which an artisan has been accus- 
tomed all his life, for severe labour of the arms ; 
the best efforts would turn to little account, and 
occasion would be given for the unthinking and 
the unfeeling unwarrantably to reproach those 
who are put upon such employment, as idle, 
froward, and unworthy of relief, either by law 
or in any other way ! Were this statement 
correct, there would indeed be an end of the 
argument, the principle here maintained would 
be superseded. But, alas! it is far otherwise. 
That principle, applicable to the benefit of all 
countries, is indispensable for England, upon whose 
coast families are perpetually deprived of their 
support by shipwreck, and where large masses 
of men are so liable to be thrown out of their 
ordinary means of gaining bread, by changes in 
commercial intercourse, subject mainly or solely 
to the will of foreign powers ; by new discoveries 
in arts and manufactures ; and by reckless laws, 
in conformity with theories of political economy, 
which, whether right or wrong in the abstract, 
have proved a scourge to tens of thousands, by 
the abruptness with which they have been carried 
into practice. 
But it is urged, — refuse altogether compulsory 
relief to the able-bodied, and the number of those 
who stand in need of relief will steadily diminish 
through a conviction of an absolute necessity for 

greater forethought, and more prudent care of a 
man's earnings. Undoubtedly it would, but so also 
would it, and in a much greater degree, if the 
legislative provisions were retained, and parochial 
relief administered under the care of the upper 
classes, as it ought to be. For it has been invaria- 
bly found, that wherever the funds have been 
raised and applied under the superintendence of 
gentlemen and substantial proprietors, acting in 
vestries, and as overseers, pauperism has diminished 
accordingly. Proper care in that quarter would 
effectually check what is felt in some districts to 
be one of the worst evils in the poor law system, 
viz. the readiness of small and needy proprietors 
to join in imposing rates that seemingly subject 
them to great hardships, while, in fact, this is done 
with a mutual understanding, that the relief each 
is ready to bestow upon his still poorer neighbours 
will be granted to himself, or his relatives, should 
it hereafter be applied for. 
But let us look to inner sentiments of a nobler 
quality, in order to know what we have to build 
upon. Affecting proofs occur in every one's 
experience, who is acquainted with the unfortunate 
and the indigent, of their unwillingness to derive 
their subsistence from aught but their own funds 
or labour, or to be indebted to parochial assistance 
for the attainment of any object, however dear to 
them. A case was reported, the other day, from a 
coroner's inquest, of a pair who, through the space 
of four years, had carried about their dead infant 
from house to house, and from lodging to lodging, 
as then; necessities drove them, rather than ask 
the parish to bear the expense of its interment : — 
the poor creatures lived in the hope of one day 
being able to bury their child at their own cost. 
It must have been heart-rending to see and hear 
the mother, who had been called upon to account 
for the state in which the body was found, make 
this deposition. By some, judging coldly, if not 
harshly, this conduct might be imputed to an 
unwarrantable pride, as she and her husband had, 
it is true, been once in prosperity. But examples, 
where the spirit of independence works with equal 
strength, though not with like miserable accom- 
paniments, are frequently to be found even yet 
among the humblest peasantry and mechanics. 
There is not, then, sufficient cause for doubting 
that a like sense of honour may be revived among 
the people, and their ancient habits of independence 
restored, without resorting to those severities which 
the new Poor Law Act has introduced. 
But even if the surfaces of things only are to be 
examined, we have a right to expect that lawgivers 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

should take into account the various tempers and 
dispositions of mankind: while some are led, by 
the existence of a legislative provision, into idle- 
ness and extravagance, the economical virtues 
might be cherished in others by the knowledge 
that, if all their efforts fail, they have in the Poor 
Laws a ' refuge from the storm and a shadow from 
the heat.' Despondency and distraction are no 
friends to prudence : the springs of industry will 
relax, if cheerfulness be destroyed by anxiety ; 
without hope men become reckless, and have a 
sullen pride in adding to the heap of their own 
wretchedness. He who feels that he is abandoned 
by his fellow-men will be almost irresistibly driven 
to care little for himself ; will lose his self-respect 
accordingly, and with that loss what remains to 
him of virtue  
With all due deference to the particular expe- 
rience, and general intelligence of the individuals 
who framed the Act, and of those who in and out 
of parliament have approved of and supported it ; 
it may be said, that it proceeds too much upon the 
presumption that it is a labouring man's own fault 
if he be not, as the phrase is, beforehand with the 
world. But the most prudent are liable to be 
thrown back by sickness, cutting them off from 
labour, and causing to them expense : and who 
but has observed how distress creeps upon multi- 
tudes without misconduct of their own ; and merely 
from a gradual fall in the price of labour, without 
a correspondent one in the price of provisions ; so 
that men who may have ventured upon the marriage 
state with a fair prospect of maintaining their 
families in comfort and happiness, see them reduced 
to a pittance which no effort of theirs can increase ? 
Let it be remembered, also, that there are thousands 
with whom vicious habits of expense are not the 
cause why they do not store up their gains ; but 
they are generous and kind-hearted, and ready to 
help their kindred and friends; moreover, they 
have a faith in Providence that those who have 
been prompt to assist others, will not be left 
destitute, should they themselves come to need. 
By acting from these blended feelings, numbers 
have rendered themselves incapable of standing 
up against a sudden reverse. Nevertheless, these 
men, in common with all who have the misfortune 
to be in want, if many theorists had their wish, 
would be thrown upon one or other of those three 
sharp points of condition before adverted to, from 
which the intervention of law has hitherto saved 
them. 
All that has been said tends to show how the 
principle contended for makes the gift of life more 

valuable, and has, it may be hoped, led to the con- 
clusion that its legitimate operation is to make men 
worthier of that gift : in other words, not to degrade 
but to exalt human nature. But the subject must 
not be dismissed without adverting to the indirect 
influence of the same principle upon the moral 
sentiments of a people among whom it is embodied 
in law. In our criminal jurisprudence there is a 
maxim, deservedly eulogised, that it is better that 
ten guilty persons should escape, than that one 
innocent man should suffer ; so, also, might it be 
maintained, with regard to the Poor Laws, that it 
is better for the interests of humanity among the 
people at large, that ten undeserving should partake 
of the funds provided, than that one morally good 
man, through want of relief, should either have his 
principles corrupted, or his energies destroyed; 
than that such a one should either be driven to do 
wrong, or be cast to the earth in utter hopelessness. 
In France, the English maxim of criminal juris- 
prudence is reversed ; there, it is deemed better 
that ten innocent men should suffer, than one guilty 
escape : in France, there is no universal provision 
for the poor; and we may judge of the small 
value set upon human life in the metropolis of that 
country, by merely noticing the disrespect with 
which, after death, the body is treated, not by the 
thoughtless vulgar, but in schools of anatomy, 
presided over by men allowed to be, in their own 
art and in physical science, among the most 
enlightened in the world. In the East, where 
countries are overrun with population as with a 
weed, infinitely more respect is shown to the 
remains of the deceased ; and what a bitter mockery 
is it, that this insensibility should be found where 
civil polity is so busy in minor regulations, and 
ostentatiously careful to gratify the luxurious 
propensities, whether social or intellectual, of the 
multitude ! Irreligion is, no doubt, much concerned 
with this offensive disrespect, shown to the bodies of 
the dead in France ; but it is mainly attributable to 
the state in which so many of the living are left by 
the absence of compulsory provision for the indigent 
so humanely established by the law of England. 
Sights of abject misery, perpetually recurring, 
harden the heart of the community. In the perusal 
of history, and of works of fiction, we are not, 
indeed, unwilling to have our commiseration ex- 
cited by such objects of distress as they present to 
us ; but, in the concerns of real life, men know 
that such emotions are not given to be indulged 
for their own sakes : there, the conscience de- 
clares to them that sympathy must be followed by 
action ; and if there exist a previous conviction 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

that the power to relieve is utterly inadequate to 
the demand, the eye shrinks from communication 
with wretchedness, and pity and compassion 
languish, like any other qualities that are deprived 
of their natural aliment. Let these considera- 
tions be duly weighed by those who trust to the 
hope that an increase of private charity, with all 
its advantages of superior discrimination, would 
more than compensate for the abandonment of 
those principles, the wisdom of which has been 
here insisted upon. How discouraging, also, would 
be the sense of injustice, which could not fail 
to arise in the minds of the well-disposed, if the 
burden of supporting the poor, a burden of which 
the selfish have hitherto by compulsion borne a 
share, should now, or hereafter, be thrown exclu- 
sively upon the benevolent. 
By having put an end to the Slave Trade and 
Slavery, the British people are exalted in the 
scale of humanity ; and they cannot but feel so, 
if they look into themselves, and duly consider 
their relation to God and their fellow-creatures. 
That was a noble advance ; but a retrograde 
movement will assuredly be made, if ever the 
principle, which has been here defended, should 
be either avowedly abandoned or but ostensibly 
retained. 
But after all, there may be a little reason to 
apprehend permanent injury from any experiment 
that may be tried. On the one side will be 
human nature rising up hi her own defence, and 
on the other prudential selfishness acting to the 
same purpose, from a conviction that, without a 
compulsory provision for the exigencies of the 
labouring multitude, that degree of ability to re- 
gulate the price of labour, which is indispensable 
for the reasonable interest of arts and manufac- 
tures, cannot, in Great Britain, be upheld. 
II. In a poem of the foregoing collection, allusion 
is made to the state of the workmen congregated in 
manufactories. In order to relieve many of the 
evils to which that class of society are subject and 
to establish a better harmony between them and 
their employers, it would be well to repeal such 
laws as prevent the formation of joint-stock com- 
panies. There are, no doubt, many and great 
obstacles to the formation and salutary working of 
these societies, inherent in the mind of those whom 
they would obviously benefit. But the combina- 
tions of masters to keep down, unjustly, the price 
of labour would be fairly checked by them, as 
far as they were practicable ; they would encourage 
economy, inasmuch as they would enable a man to 

draw profit from hi savings, by investing them in 
buildings or machinery for processes of manufacture 
with which he was habitually connected. His little 
capital would then be working for him while he was 
at rest or asleep ; he would more clearly perceive 
the necessity of capital for carrying on great 
works ; he would better learn to respect the 
larger portions of it in the hands of others ; he 
would be less tempted to join in unjust combina- 
tions ; and, for the sake of his own property, if 
not for higher reasons, he would be slow to pro- 
mote local disturbance, or endanger public tran- 
quillity ; he would, at least, be loth to act in that 
way knowingly : for it is not to be denied that 
such societies might be nurseries of opinions 
unfavourable to a mixed constitution of govern- 
ment, like that of Great Britain. The democratic 
and republican spirit which they might be apt to 
foster would not, however, be dangerous in itself, 
but only as it might act without being sufficiently 
counterbalanced, either by landed proprietorship, 
or by a Church extending itself so as to embrace 
an ever-growing and ever-shifting population of 
mechanics and artisans. But if the tendencies of 
such societies would be to make the men prosper 
who might belong to them, rulers and legislators 
should rejoice in the result, and do their duty to 
the state by upholding and extending the influence 
of that Church to which it owes, in so great a 
measure, its safety, its prosperity, and its glory. 
This, in the temper of the present times, may 
be difficult, but it is become indispensable, since 
large towns in great numbers have sprung up, and 
others have increased tenfold, with little or no 
dependence upon the gentry and the landed pro- 
prietors ; and apart from those mitigated feudal 
institutions, which, till of late, have acted so 
powerfully upon the composition of the House of 
Commons. Now it may be affirmed that, in quar- 
ters where there is not an attachment to the 
Church, or the landed aristocracy, and a pride in 
supporting them, there the people will dislike 
both, and be ready, upon such incitements as are 
perpetually recurring, to join in attempts to over- 
throw them. There is no neutral ground here : 
from want of due attention to the state of society 
in large towns and manufacturing districts, and 
ignorance or disregard of these obvious truths, innu- 
merable well-meaning persons became zealous sup- 
porters of a Reform Bill, the qualities and powers 
of which, whether destructive or constructive, 
they would otherwise have been afraid of; and even 
the framers of that bill, swayed as they might be 
by party resentments and personal ambition, 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

could not have gone so far, had not they too been 
lamentably ignorant or neglectful of the same 
truths both of fact and philosophy. 
But let that pass ; and let no opponent of the 
bill be tempted to compliment his own foresight, 
by exaggerating the mischiefs and dangers that 
have sprung from it : let not time be wasted in 
j profitless regrets ; and let those party distinctions 
vanish to their very names that have separated 
men who, whatever course they may have pur- 
sued, have ever had a bond of union in the wish 
to save the limited monarchy, and those other 
institutions that have, under Providence, ren- 
dered for so long a period of time this country the 
happiest and worthiest of which there is any record 
since the foundation of civil society. 
III. A philosophic mind is best pleased when 
looking at religion in its spiritual bearing ; as a 
guide of conduct, a solace under affliction, and a 
support amid the instabilities of mortal life : but 
the Church having been forcibly brought by poli- 
tical considerations to my notice, while treat- 
ing of the labouring classes, I cannot forbear 
saying a few words upon that momentous topic. 
There is a loud clamour for extensive change in 
that department. The clamour would be entitled 
to more respect if they who are the most eager to 
swell it with their voices were not generally the 
most ignorant of the real state of the Church, and 
the service it renders to the community. Reform 
is the word employed. Let us pause and consider 
what sense it is apt to carry, and how things are 
confounded by a lax use of it. The great religious 
Reformation, in the sixteenth century, did not 
profess to be a new construction, but a restoration 
of something fallen into decay, or put out of sight. 
That familiar and justifiable use of the word seems 
to have paved the way for fallacies with respect to 
the term reform, which it is difficult to escape from. 
Were we to speak of improvement, and the cor- 
rection of abuses, we should run less risk of being 
deceived ourselves, or of misleading others. We 
should be less likely to fall blindly into the belief, 
that the change demanded is a renewal of some- 
thing that has existed before, and that, therefore, 
we have experience on our side ; nor should we 
be equally tempted to beg the question, that the 
change for which we are eager must be advan- 
tageous. From generation to generation, men are 
the dupes of words ; and it is painful to observe, 
that so many of our species are most tenacious of 
those opinions which they have formed with the 
least consideration. They who are the readiest to 
 

meddle with public affairs, whether in church or 
state, fly to generalities, that they may be eased 
from the trouble of thinking about particulars ; and 
thus is deputed to mechanical instrumentality the 
work which vital knowledge only can do well. 
K Abolish pluralities, have a resident incumbent 
in every parish," is a favourite cry ; but, without 
adverting to other obstacles in the way of this 
specious scheme, it may be asked what benefit 
would accrue from its indiscriminate, adoption to 
counterbalance the harm it would introduce, by 
nearly extinguishing the order of curates, unless 
the revenues of the church should grow with the 
population, and be greatly increased in many 
thinly peopled districts, especially among the 
parishes of the North. 
The order of curates is so beneficial, that some 
particular notice of it seems to be required in this 
place. For a church poor as, relatively to the 
numbers of people, that of England is, and pro- 
bably will continue to be, it is no small advantage 
to have youthful servants, who will work upon the 
wages of hope and expectation. Still more advan- 
tageous is it to have, by means of this order, young 
men scattered over the country, who being more 
detached from the temporal concerns of the bene- 
fice, have more leisure for improvement and study, 
and are less subject to be brought into secular 
collision with those who are under their spiritual 
guardianship. The curate, if he reside at a distance 
from the incumbent, undertakes the requisite 
responsibilities of a temporal kind, in that modified 
way which prevents him, as a new-comer, from 
being charged with selfishness : while it prepares 
him for entering upon a benefice of his own, with 
something of a suitable experience. If he should 
act under and in co-operation with a resident 
incumbent, the gain is mutual. His studies will 
probably be assisted ; and his training, managed 
by a superior, will not be liable to relapse in matters 
of prudence, seemliness, or in any of the highest 
cares of his functions ; and by way of return for 
these benefits to the pupil, it will often happen 
that the zeal of a middle-aged or declining incum- 
bent will be revived, by being in near communion 
with the ardour of youth, when his own efforts may 
have languished through a melancholy conscious- 
ness that they have not produced as much good 
among his flock as, when he first entered upon the 
charge, he fondly hoped. 
Let one remark, and that not the least im- 
portant, be added. A curate, entering for the 
first time upon his office, comes from college after 
a course of expense, and with such inexperience in 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

the use of money, that, in his new situation, he is 
apt to fall unawares into pecuniary difficulties. If 
this happens to him, much more likely is it to 
happen to the youthful incumbent ; whose relations, 
to his parishioners and to society, are more com- 
plicated ; and, his income being larger and indepen- 
dent of another, a costlier style of living is required 
of him by public opinion. If embarrassment should 
ensue, and with that unavoidably some loss of 
respectability, his future usefulness will be propor- 
tionably impaired : not so with the curate, for he 
can easily remove and start afresh with a stock of 
experience and an unblemished reputation ; whereas 
the early indiscretions of an incumbent being rarely 
forgotten, may be impediments to the efficacy of 
his ministry for the remainder of his life. The 
same observations would apply with equal force to 
doctrine. A young minister is liable to errors, 
from his notions being either too lax or overstrained. 
In both cases it would prove injurious that the 
error should be remembered, after study and re- 
flection, with advancing years, shall have brought 
him to a clearer discernment of the truth, and 
better judgment in the application of it. 
It must be acknowledged that, among the regu- 
lations of ecclesiastical polity, none at first view 
are more attractive than that which prescribes for 
every parish a resident incumbent. How agreeable 
to picture to one's self, as has been done by poets 
and romance-writers, from Chaucer down to 
Goldsmith, a man devoted to his ministerial office, 
with not a wish or a thought ranging beyond the 
circuit of its cares ! Nor is it in poetry and fiction 
only that such characters are found ; they are 
scattered, it is hoped not sparingly, over real life, 
especially in sequestered and rural districts, where 
there is but small influx of new inhabitants, and 
little change of occupation. The spirit of the 
Gospel, unaided by acquisitions of profane learning 
and experience in the world,— that spirit, and the 
obligations of the sacred office may, in such situa- 
tions, suffice to effect most of what is needful. 
But for the complex state of society that prevails 
in England, much more is required, both in large 
towns, and in many extensive districts of the 
country. A minister there should not only be 
irreproachable in maimers and morals, but accom- 
plished in learning, as far as is possible without 
sacrifice of the least of his pastoral duties. As 
necessary, perhaps more so, is it that he should be 
a citizen aswell as a scholar ; thoroughly acquainted 
with the structure of society, and the constitution 
of civil government, and able to reason upon both 
with the most expert ; all ultimately in order to 

support the truths of Christianity, and to diffuse 
its blessings. 
A young man coming fresh from the place of 
his education, cannot have brought with him these 
accomplishments ; and if the scheme of equalising 
church incomes, which many advisers are much 
bent upon, be realised, so that there should be 
little or no secular inducement for a clergyman to 
desire a removal from the spot where he may 
chance to have been first set down ; surely not 
only opportunities for obtaining the requisite qua- 
lifications would be diminished, but the motives 
for desiring to obtain them would be proportionably 
weakened. And yet these qualifications are indis- 
pensable for the diffusion of that knowledge, by 
which alone the political philosophy of the New 
Testament can be rightly expounded, and its 
precepts adequately enforced. In these times, 
when the press is daily exercising so great a power 
over the minds of the people, for wrong or for 
right as may happen, that preacher ranks among 
the first of benefactors who, without stooping to 
the direct treatment of current politics and passing 
events, can furnish infallible guidance through the 
delusions that surround them ; and who, appealing 
to the sanctions of Scripture, may place the grounds 
of its injunctions in so clear a light, that disaffec- 
tion shall cease to be cultivated as a laudable 
propensity, and loyalty cleansed from the dishonour 
of a blind and prostrate obedience. 
It is not, however, in regard to civic duties 
alone, that this knowledge in a minister of the 
Gospel is important ; it is still more so for softening 
and subduing private and personal discontents. 
In all places, and at all times, men have gra- 
tuitously troubled themselves, because their sur- 
vey of the dispensations of Providence has been 
partial and narrow ; but now that readers are so 
greatly multiplied, men judge as they are taught, 
and repinings are engendered every where, by 
imputations being cast upon the government ; and 
are prolonged or aggravated by being ascribed to 
misconduct or injustice in rulers, when the indi- 
vidual himself only is in fault. If a Christian 
pastor be competent to deal with these humours, 
as they may be dealt with, and by no members of 
society so successfully, both from more frequent 
and more favourable opportunities of intercourse, 
and by aid of the authority with which he speaks ; 
he will be a teacher of moderation, a dispenser of 
the wisdom that blunts approaching distress by 
submission to God's will, and lightens, by patience, 
grievances which cannot be removed. 
We live in times when nothing, of public good 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

at least, is generally acceptable, but what we 
believe can be traced to preconceived intention, 
and specific acts and formal contrivances of human 
understanding. A Christian instructor thoroughly 
accomplished would be a standing restraint upon 
such presumptuousness of judgment, by impressing 
the truth that — 
In the unreasoning progress of the world 
A wiser spirit is at work for us, 
• A better eye than ours. MS. 
Revelation points to the purity and peace of a 
future world; but our sphere of duty is upon 
earth ; and the relations of impure and conflicting 
things to each other must be understood, or we 
shall be perpetually going wrong, in all but goodness 
of intention ; and goodness of intention will itself 
relax through frequent disappointment. How 
desirable, then, is it, that a minister of the Gospel 
should be versed in the knowledge of existing facts, 
and be accustomed to a wide range of social ex- 
perience ! Nor is it less desirable for the purpose 
of counterbalancing and tempering in his own 
mind that ambition with which spiritual power is 
as apt to be tainted as any other species of power 
which men covet or possess. 
It must be obvious that the scope of the argu- 
ment is to discourage an attempt which would 
introduce into the Church of England an equality 
of income, and station, upon the model of that of 
Scotland. The sounder part of the Scottish nation 
know what good their ancestors derived from their 
church, and feel how deeply the living generation 
is indebted to it. They respect and love it, as ac- 
commodated in so great a measure to a compara- 
tively poor country, through the far greater 
portion of which prevails a uniformity of employ- 
ment ; but the acknowledged deficiency of theo- 
logical learning among the clergy of that church is 
easily accounted for by this very equality. What 
else may be wanting there, it would be unpleasant 
to inquire, and might prove invidious to determine : 
one thing, however, is clear ; that in all countries 
the temporalities of the Church Establishment 
should bear an analogy to the state of society, 
otherwise it cannot diffuse its influence through 
the whole community. In a country so rich and 
luxurious as England, the character of its clergy 
must unavoidably sink, and their influence be 
every where impaired, if individuals from the 
upper ranks, and men of leading talents, are to 
have no inducements to enter into that body but 
such as are purely spiritual. And this ' tinge of 
secularity ' is no reproach to the clergy, nor does 

it imply a deficiency of spiritual endowments. 
Parents and guardians, looking forward to sources 
of honourable maintenance for their children and 
wards, often direct their thoughts early towards 
the church, being determined partly by outward 
circumstances, and partly by indications of serious- 
ness, or intellectual fitness. It is natural that a 
boy or youth, with such a prospect before him, 
should turn his attention to those studies, and be 
led into those habits of reflection, which will hi 
some degree tend to prepare him for the duties 
he is hereafter to undertake. As he draws nearer 
to the time when he will be called to these duties, 
he is both led and compelled to examine the 
Scriptures. He becomes more and more sensible 
of then' truth. Devotion grows in him ; and what 
might begin in temporal considerations, will end 
(as in a majority of instances we trust it does) in a 
spiritual-mindedness not unworthy of that Gospel, 
the lessons of which he is to teach, and the faith of 
which he is to inculcate. Not inappositely may be 
here repeated an observation which, from its ob- 
viousness and importance, must have been fre- 
quently made, viz. that the impoverishing of the 
clergy, and bringing their incomes much nearer 
to a level, would not cause them to become less 
worldly-minded : the emoluments, howsoever re- 
duced, would be as eagerly sought for, but by men 
from lower classes in society ; men who, by their 
manners, habits, abilities, and the scanty measure 
of their attainments, would unavoidably be less 
fitted for their station, and less competent to 
discharge its duties. 
Visionary notions have in all ages been afloat 
upon the subject of best providing for the clergy ; 
notions which have been sincerely entertained by 
good men, with a view to the improvement of that 
order, and eagerly caught at and dwelt upon, by the 
designing, for its degradation and disparagement. 
Some are beguiled by what they call the voluntary 
system, not seeing (what stares one in the face at 
the very threshold) that they who stand in most 
need of religious instruction are unconscious of 
the want, and therefore cannot reasonably be ex- 
pected to make any sacrifices in order to supply 
it. Will the licentious, the sensual, and the de- 
praved, take from the means of their gratifications 
and pursuits, to support a discipline that cannot 
advance without uprooting the trees that bear the 
fruit which they devour so greedily ? Will they 
pay the price of that seed whose harvest is to be 
reaped in an invisible world  A voluntary system 
for the religious exigencies of a people numerous 
and circumstanced as we are ! Not more absurd 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

 

would it be to expect that a knot of boys should 
draw upon the pittance of their pocket-money to 
build schools, or out of the abundance of their dis- 
cretion be able to select fit masters to teach and 
keep them in order ! Some, who clearly perceive 
the incompetence and folly of such a scheme for 
the agricultural part of the people, nevertheless 
think it feasible in large towns, where the rich 
might subscribe for the religious instruction of the 
poor. Alas ! they know little of the thick dark- 
ness that spreads over the streets and alleys of our 
large towns. The parish of Lambeth, a few years 
since, contained not more than one church and three 
or four small proprietary chapels, while dissenting 
chapels, of every denomination were still more scan- 
tily found there ; yet the inhabitants of the parish 
amounted at that time to upwards of ,. Were 
the parish church and the chapels of the Establish- 
ment existing there, an impediment to the spread 
of the Gospel among that mass of people  Who 
shall dare to say so ? But if any one, in the face 
of the fact which has just been stated, and in op- 
position to authentic reports to the same effect 
from various other quarters, should still contend, 
that a voluntary system is sufficient for the spread 
and maintenance of religion, we would ask, what 
kind of religion? wherein would it differ, among 
the many, from deplorable fanaticism % 
For the preservation of the Church Establish- 
ment, all men, whether they belong to it or not, 
could they perceive their true interest, would be 
strenuous : but how inadequate are its provisions 
for the needs of the country ! and how much is it 
to be regretted that, while its zealous friends yield 
to alarms on account of the hostility of dissent, 
they should so much over-rate the danger to be 
apprehended from that quarter, and almost over- 
look the fact that hundreds of thousands of our 
feUow-countrymen, though formally and nominally 
of the Church of England, never enter her places 
of worship, neither have they communication with 
her ministers ! This deplorable state of things 
was partly produced by a decay of zeal among the 
rich and influential, and partly by a want of due 
expansive power in the constitution of the Estab- 
lishment as regulated by law. Private benefactors, 
in their efforts to build and endow churches, have 
been frustrated, or too much impeded by legal 
obstacles : these, where they are unreasonable or 
unfitted for the times, ought to be removed ; and, 
keeping clear of intolerance and injustice, means 
should be used to render the presence and powers 
of the church commensurate with the wants of a 
shifting and still-increasing population. 

This cannot be effected, unless the English 
Government vindicate the truth, that, as her 
church exists for the benefit of all (though not in 
equal degree), whether of her communion or not, 
all should be made to contribute to its support. 
If this ground be abandoned, cause will be given to 
fear that a moral wound may be inflicted upon 
the heart of the English people, for which a remedy 
cannot be speedily provided by the utmost efforts 
which the members of the Church will themselves 
be able to make. 
But let the friends of the church be of good 
courage. Powers are at work, by which, under 
Divine Providence, she may be strengthened and 
the sphere of her usefulness extended ; not by 
alterations in her Liturgy, accommodated to this 
or that demand of finical taste, nor by cutting off 
this or that from her articles or Canons, to which 
the scrupulous or the overweening may object. 
Covert schism, and open nonconformity, would 
survive after alterations, however promising in 
the eyes of those whose subtilty had been exercised 
in making them. Latitudinarianism is the par- 
helion of liberty of conscience, and will ever 
successfully lay claim to a divided worship. 
Among Presbyterians, Socinians, Baptists, and 
Independents, there will always be found numbers 
who will tire of their several creeds, and some 
will come over to the Church. Conventicles may 
disappear, congregations in each denomination 
may fall into decay or be broken up, but the con- 
quests which the National Church ought chiefly to 
aim at, lie among the thousands and tens of thou- 
sands of the unhappy outcasts who grow up with 
no religion at all. The wants of these cannot 
but be feelingly remembered. Whatever may be 
the disposition of the new constituencies under 
the reformed parliament, and the course which 
the men of their choice may be inclined or com- 
pelled to follow, it may be confidently hoped that 
individuals acting in their private capacities, will 
endeavour to make up for the deficiencies of the 
legislature. Is it too much to expect that pro- 
prietors of large estates, where the inhabitants 
are without religious instruction, or where it is 
sparingly supplied, will deem it their duty to take 
part in this good work ; and that thriving manu- 
facturers and merchants will, in their several 
neighbourhoods, be sensible of the like obligation, 
and act upon it with generous rivalry ? 
Moreover, the force of public opinion is rapidly 
increasing : and some may bend to it, who are not 
so happy as to be swayed by a higher motive ; 
especially they who derive large incomes from 

 

APPENDIX, PREFACES, &c. 

lay-inipropriations, in tracts of country where 
ministers are few and meagrely provided for. 
A claim still stronger may be acknowledged by 
those who, round their superb habitations, or else- 
where, walk over vast estates which were lavished 
upon their ancestors by royal favouritism or pur- 
chased at insignificant prices after church-spo- 
liation ; such proprietors, though not conscience- 
stricken (there is no call for that) may be 
prompted to make a return for which their tenantry 
and dependents will learn to bless their names. 
An impulse has been given ; an accession of means 
from these several sources, co-operating with a 
we^-considered change in the distribution of some 
parts of the property at present possessed by the 
church, a change scrupulously founded upon due 
respect to law and justice, will, we trust, bring 
about so much of what her friends desire, that the 
rest may be calmly waited for, with thankfulness 
for what shall have been obtained. 
Let it not be thought unbecoming in a layman, 
to have treated at length a subject with which the 
clergy are more intimately conversant. All may, 
without impropriety, speak of what deeply concerns 
all ; nor need an apology be offered for going over 
ground which has been trod before so ably and so 
often : without pretending, however, to any thing 
of novelty, either in matter or manner, something 
may have been offered to view, which will save the 
writer from the imputation of having little to re- 
commend his labour, but goodness of intention. 
It was with reference to thoughts and feelings 
expressed in verse, that I entered upon the above 
notices, and with verse I will conclude. The 
passage is extracted from my MSS. written above 
thirty years ago : it turns upon the individual 
dignity which humbleness of social condition does 
not preclude, but frequently promotes. It has no 
direct bearing upon clubs for the discussion of 
public affairs, nor upon political or trade-unions ; 
but if a single workman — who, being a member of 
one of those clubs, runs the risk of becoming an 
agitator, or who, being enrolled in a union, must 
be left without a will of his own, and therefore a 
slave — should read these lines, and be touched 
by them, I should indeed rejoice, and little 
would I care for losing credit as a poet with 
intemperate critics, who think differently from me 
upon political philosophy or public measures, if the 

sober-minded admit that, in general views, my 
affections have been moved, and my imagination 
exercised, under and for the guidance of reason. 
' Here might I pause, and bend in reverence 
To Nature, and the power of human minds; 
To men as they are men within themselves. 
How oft high service is performed within, 
When all the external man is rude in show ; 
Not like a temple rich with pomp and gold, 
But a mere mountain chapel that protects 
Its simple worshippers from sun and shower ! 
Of these, said I, shall be my song ; of these, 
If future years mature me for the task, 
Will I record the praises, making verse 
Deal boldly with substantial things — in truth 
And sanctity of passion, speak of these, 
That justice may be done, obeisance paid 
Where it is due. Thus haply shall I teach 
Inspire, through unadulterated ears 
Pour rapture, tenderness, and hope ; my theme 
No other than the very heart of man, 
Astound among the best of those who live, 
Not unexalted by religious faith, 
Nor uninformed by books, good books, though few, 
In Nature's presence : thence may I select 
Sorrow that is not sorrow, but delight, 
And miserable love that is not pain 
To hear of, for the glory that redounds 
Therefrom to human kind, and what we are. 
Be mine to follow with no timid step 
Where knowledge leads me ; it shall be my pride 
That I have dared to tread this holy ground, 
Speaking no dream, but things oracular, 
Matter not lightly to be heard by those 
Who to the letter of the outward promise 
Do read the invisible soul ; by men adroit 
In speech, and for communion with the world 
Accomplished, minds whose faculties are then 
Most active when they are most eloquent, 
And elevated most when most admired. 
Men may be found of other mould than these ; 
Who are their own upholders, to themselves 
Encouragement and energy, and will ; 
Expressing liveliest thoughts in lively words 
As native passion dictates. Others, too, 
There are, among the walks of homely life, 
Still higher, men for contemplation framed ; 
Shy, and unpractised in the strife of phrase; 
Meek men, whose very souls perhaps would sink 
Beneath them, summoned to such intercourse. 
Their's is the language of the heavens, the power, 
The thought, the image, and the silent joy : 
Words are but under-agents in their souls ; 
When they are grasping with their greatest strength 
They do not breatheamong them ; thislspeak 
In gratitude to God, who feeds our hearts 
For his own service, knoweth, loveth us, 
When we are unregarded by the world.' 

ADDITIONAL POEMS. 

Giohdano, verily thy Pencil's skill 
Hath here portrayed with Nature's happiest grace 
The fair Endymion couched on Latmos-hill ; 
And Dian gazing on the Shepherd's face 
In rapture, — yet suspending her embrace, 
As not unconscious with what power the thrill 
Of her most timid touch his sleep would chase, 
And, with his sleep, that beauty calm and still. 
may this work have found its last retreat 
Here in a mountain-Bard's secure abode, 
One to whom, yet a School-boy, Cynthia showed 
A face of love which he in love would greet, 
Fixed, by her smile, upon some rocky seat ; 
Or lured along where green-wood paths he trod. 
Rydal Mount, . 

Who but is pleased to watch the moon on high 
Travelling where she from time to time enshrouds 
Her head, and nothing loth her Majesty 
Eenounces, till among the scattered clouds 
One with its kindling edge declares that soon 
"Will reappear before the uplifted eye 
A Form as bright, as beautiful a moon, 
To glide in open prospect through clear sky. 
Pity that such a promise e'er should prove 
False in the issue, that yon seeming space 
Of sky, should be in truth the steadfast face 
Of a cloud fiat and dense, through which must 
move, 
(By transit not unlike man's frequent doom) 
The wanderer lost in more determined gloom ! 
S. 

Where lies the truth? has Man, in wisdom's 
creed 
A pitiable doom ; for respite brief 
A care more anxious, or a heavier grief? 
Is he ungrateful, and doth little heed 
God's bounty, soon forgotten ; or indeed, 
Must Man, with labour born, awake to sorrow 
When flowers rejoice and Larks with rival speed 
Spring from their nests to bid the Sun good 

They mount for rapture as their songs proclaim 
Warbled in hearing both of earth and sky ; 
But o'er the contrast wherefore heave a sigh ? 
Like those aspirants let us soar — our aim, 
Through life's worst trials, whether shocks or 
snares, 
A happier, brighter, purer Heaven than theirs. 
. 

ILLUSTEATED BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS. 
Discourse was deemed Man's noblest attribute, 
And written words the glory of his hand ; 
Then followed Printing with enlarged command 
For thought — dominion vast and absolute 
For spreading truth, and making love expand. 
Now prose and verse sunk into disrepute 
Must lacquey a dumb Art that best can suit 
The taste of this once-intellectual Land. 
A backward movement surely have we here, 
From manhood — back to childhood ; for the age — 
Back towards caverned life's first rude career. 
Avaunt this vile abuse of pictured page ! 
Must eyes be all in all, the tongue and ear 
Nothing ? Heaven keep us from a lower stage ! 
. 

The unremitting voice of nightly streams 
That waste so oft, we think, its tuneful powers, 
If neither soothing to the worm that gleams 
Through dewy grass, nor small birds hushed in 
bowers, 
Nor unto silent leaves and drowsy flowers, — 
That voice of unpretending harmony 
(For who what is shall measure by what seems 
To be, or not to be, 
Or tax high Heaven with prodigality?) 
Once not a healing influence that can creep 
Into the human breast, and mix with sleep 
To regulate the motion of our dreams 
For kindly issues — as through every clime 
Was felt near murmuring brooks in earliest time ; 
As at this day, the rudest swains who dwell 
Where torrents roar, or hear the tinkling knell 
Of water-breaks, with grateful heart could tell. 
. 
T T  


 

ADDITIONAL POEMS. 

I know an aged Man constrained to dwell 
In a large house of public charity, 
Where he abides, as in a Prisoner's cell, 
With numbers near, alas ! no company. 
When he could creep about, at will, though poor 
And forced to live on alms, this old Man fed 
A Redbreast, one that to his cottage door 
Came not, but in a lane partook his bread. 
There, at the root of one particular tree, 
An easy seat this worn-out Labourer found 
While Robin pecked the crumbs upon his knee 
Laid one by one, or scattered on the ground. 
Dear intercourse was theirs, day after day ; 
What signs of mutual gladness when they met ! 
Think of their common peace, their simple play, 
The parting moment and its fond regret. 
Months passed in love that failed not to fulfil, 
In spite of season's change, its own demand, 
By fluttering pinions here and busy bill ; 
There by caresses from a tremulous hand. 
Thus in the chosen spot a tie so strong 
Was formed between the solitary pair, 
That when his fate had housed him mid a throng 
The Captive shunned all converse proffered there. 
Wife, children, kindred, they were dead and gone ; 
But, if no evil hap his wishes crossed, 
One living Stay was left, and on that one 
Some recompense for all that he had lost. 
that the good old Man had power to prove, 
By message sent through air or visible token, 
That still he loves the Bird, and still must love ; 
That friendship lasts though fellowship is broken ! 

TO AN OCTOGENARIAN. 
Affections lose their objects ; Time brings forth 
No successors ; and, lodged in memory, 
If love exist no longer, it must die, — 
Wanting accustomed food must pass from earth, 
Or never hope to reach a second birth. 
This sad belief, the happiest that is left 
To thousands, share not thou ; howe'er bereft, 
Scorned, or neglected, fear not such a dearth. 
Though poor and destitute of friends thou art, 
Perhaps the sole survivor of thy race, 
One to whom Heaven assigns that mournful part 
The utmost solitude of age to face, 
Still shall be left some corner of the heart 
Where Love for living Thing can find a place. 
. 

How beautiful the Queen of Night, on high 
Her way pursuing among scattered clouds, 
Where, ever and anon, her head she shrouds 
Hidden from view in dense obscurity. 
But look, and to the watchful eye 
A brightening edge will indicate that soon 
We shall behold the struggling Moon 
Break forth, — again to walk the clear blue sky. 

Why should we weep or mourn,— Angelic boy, 
For such thou wert ere from our sight removed, 
Holy, and ever dutiful — beloved 
From day to day with never-ceasing joy, 
And hopes as dear as could the heart employ 
In aught to earth pertaining  Death has proved 
His might, nor less his mercy, as behoved — 
Death conscious that he only could destroy 
The bodily frame. That beauty is laid low 
To moulder in a far-off field of Rome ; 
But Heaven is now, blest Child, thy Spirit's home : 
When such choice communion which we know, 
Is felt, thy Roman-burial place will be 
Surely a sweet remembrancer of Thee. 
. 

INDEX TO THE POEMS. 

Acquittal of the Bishops,  
Address to a Child during a boisterous 
Winter's Evening,  
— to my Infant Daughter,  
— to the Scholars of the Village 
School of , 
— from the Spirit of Cocker- 
mouth Castle,  
Admonition,  
Affections. Poems founded on the,  
Affliction of Margaret . The,  
Afllictions of England,  
After-thought,  
— (another poem),  
Airey-Force Valley,  
Aix-la-Chapelle,  
Albano. At,  
Alfred (King),  
— His Descendants,  
Alice Fell, or Poverty,  
American Episcopacy,  
— Tradition,  
Anecdote for Fathers,  
Animal Tranquillity and Decay,  
Anticipation, October ,  
— of leaving School. Con- 
clusion of a poem in,  
Apology (Eccles. Sonnets),  
— (another poem),  
— (Punishment of Death),  
— (Tour in Scotland),  
Applethwaite. At,  
Aquapendente. Musings near,  
Armenian Lady's Love. The,  
Artegal and Elidure,  
Aspects of Christianity in America, 
 
Author's Portrait. To the,  
Avon. The,  

Banks of the Bran. Effusion on the, 
 
— oftheNith,&c. Thoughts,  
— of a Rocky Stream. Composed 
on the,  
— — — Onthe, 
Baptism,  
Beaumont. Epistle to Sir George H. 
 
■ — Upon perusing the fore- 
going, &c,  
— To Lady,  

Beautiful Picture. Upon the sight of 
a, &c,  
Beggars,  
— Sequel to the foregoing,  
Benefits. Other (Eccles. Sonnets),  
Bible. Translation of the,  
Bird of Paradise. Picture of the,  
— — Upon seeing a 
Drawing of the,  
Black Comb. On the side of,  
— View on the top of,   
Blind Highland Boy,  
Bologna. At ; The late Insurrections 
,  
Books,  
Borderers. The ; A Tragedy,  
Bothwell Castle,  
Boulogne. On being Stranded near, 
 
Breadalbane's, The Earl of, Ruined 
Mansion, &c,  
Brothers. The,  
Brougham Castle. Song at the Feast 
of,  
Brownie. The,  
Brownie's Cell. The,  
Bruges,  
— Incident at,  
Burns. At the Grave of,  
— To the Sons of,  
Butterfly. To a,  
— (another poem),  

Calais. Composed by the Sea-side 
near,  
— (another poem),  
— (another),  
— (another),  
— Fishwomen at,  
Cambridge and the Alps,  
Canute,  
Canute and Alfred, on the Sea-shore, 
 
Captivity ; Mary Queen of Scots,  
Casual Incitements,  
Catecbising,  
Cathedrals, &c,  
Catholic Cantons. Composed in one 
of the,  
Cave of Staffa,  
— — Flowers, &c,  
Celandine. To the Small,  

Celandine. To the same Flower,  
— (another poem),  
Celebrated Event in Ancient History. 
On a,  
— — On the same sub- 
ject,  
Cenotaph. Frances Fermor,  
Character. A,  
Character of the Happy Warrior,  
Characteristics of a Child,  
Charles I. To the close of the 
Troubles, &c,  
— Troubles of,  
Charles II.,  
Chaucer. Selections from ; modern- 
ised,  
Chichely, Archbishop, to Hen. V.,  
Child. To a ; written in her Album, 
 
Childhood. Poems referring to,  
— and School-Time,  
Childless Father. The,  
Church, to be erected,  
Churchyard among the Mountains. 
The,  
Cistercian Monastery,  
Clarkson, Thomas. To,  
Clerical Integrity,  
Clouds. To the,  
Cockermouth. In sight of the Town 
of,  
Coleorton. Inscription in the Grounds 
of,  
— In a Garden of the same, 
 
— For a Seat in the Groves 
of,  
— In the Grounds of,  
Cologne. Cathedral of,  
Commination Service. The,  
Complaint. A,  
— of a Forsaken Indian 
Woman. The,  
Conclusion (Eccles. Sonnets),  
— (Miscell. Sonnets),  
— (River Duddon),  
— (Prelude),  
Confirmation,  
Congratulation,  
Conjectures (Eccles. Sonnets),  
Contrast. The ; Parrot and the Wren, 
 
Convent in the Apennines. Ruins of 
a,  

 

INDEX TO THE POEMS. 

Convent of Camaldoli. At the,  
— (another poem),  
Convention of Cintra,  
— On the same occasion,  
Conversion,  
Cora Linn. Composed at,  
Cordelia M . To,  
Corruption of the Higher Clergy,  
Cottager to her Infant. The,  
Council of Clermont. The,  
Countess' Pillar,  
Cranmer,  
Crusades,  
Crusaders,  
Cuckoo. To the,  
— (another poem),  
— At Laverna,  
Cuckoo and the Nightingale,  
Cuckoo Clock. The,  
Cumberland. Coast of,  

Daisy. To the,  
— (another poem),  
— (another),  
— (another),  
Daniel in the Lion's Den. Picture 
of,  
Danish Boy. The ; A Fragment,  
Danish Conquests,  
Danube. The Source of the,  
Decay of Piety,  
Dedication (Miscell. Sonnets),  
■ — (White Doe of Rylstone), 
 
Derwent. To the River,  
— To a Friend, on the 
Banks of the,  
Despondency,  
DesDondency Corrected,  
Desultory Stanzas, &c,  
Detraction, On the, which followed 
the publication of a certain poem, 
 
Devotional Incitements,  
Dion,  
Discourse of the Wanderer, &c,  
Dissensions,  
Distractions,  
Dog. Characteristic of a Favourite, 
 
■ — TotheMemoryofthesame, 
Dover. At,  
— Near,  
— Valley of,  
— "Valley near,  
Druidical Excommunications,  
Duddon. The River; A Series of 
Sonnets,  
Dunolly Castle. On Revisiting,  
Dyer, John. To the Poet,  

Eagle. The Dunolly,  
Eagles,  
Early Spring. Lines written in,  
Early Youth. Written in very,  
Earth. Invocation to the,  
Easter Sunday. On,  
Ecclesiastical Sonnets,  
Echo upon the Gcmmi,  
Eclipse of the Sun, . The,  
Eden. The River,  

Edward VI.,  
— Signing the Warrant for the 
Execution of Joan of Kent,  
Egyptian Maid. The; or The Romance 
of the Water Lily,  
Ejaculation,  
Elegiac Musings in the Grounds of 
Coleorton Hall,  
— Stanzas. Frederick W r m. 
Goddard,  
— — to Sir G. H. B. upon 
the Death of his Sister-in-Law, 
 
— Verses. JohnWordsworth, 
Elizabeth,  
Ellen Irwin, ortheBraesof Kirtle, 
Emigrant French Clergy,  
Emigrant Mother. The,  
Emma's Dell,  
Engelberg, the Hill of the Angels,  
English Reformers in Exile,  
Enterprise. To,  
Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces,  
Epitaph in the Chapel-yard of Lang- 
dale,  
Epitaphs, from Chiabrera,  
Evening of Extraordinary Splendour. 
Upon an,  
— Sailing in a Boat at,  
— Voluntaries,  
— Walk. An Evening ; Ad- 
dressed to a Young Lady,  
Excursion. The,  
Expected Invasion. On the,  
Expostulation and Reply,  

Fact, A, and an Imagination,  
Faery Chasm. The,  
Fall of the Aar, Handec,  
Fancy. Poems of the,  
— and Tradition,  
Farewell. A,  
— Lines,  
Farmer of Tilsbury Vale. The,  
Fidelity,  
Filial Piety,  
Fishwomen, on landing at Calais,  
Fleming. To the Lady ; on the 
Foundation of Rydal Chapel,  
— On the same occasion,  
Floating Island,  
Florence. At,  
— At ; before the Picture of 
the Baptist by Raphael,  
— At ; from Michael Angelo, 
 
— At ; from the same,  
Flower Garden. A,  
— — At Coleorton Hall, 
 
Flowers,  
— Cave of Staffa,  
Force of Prayer. The,  
Foresight,  
Forms of Prayer at Sea,  
Forsaken. The,  
Fort Fuente,  
Fountain. The,  
Fox. Mr. ; Lines on the expected 
Death of,  
French Army in Russia,  
— same subject,  
French Revolution,  

French Revolution. In allusion to 
recent Histories, &c,  
French Royalist. Feelings of a,  
— and Spanish Guerillas,  
Frith of Clyde, Ailsa Crag. In the,  
— — On the,  
Funeral Service,  
Furness Abbey. At,  
— — Same subject,  


General Fast. On the late,  
General Thanksgiving, . Ode, 
 
George III. On the Death of,  
Germans on the Heights of Hock- 
heim,  
Germany. Written in,  
Gipsies,  
Glad Tidings,  
Gleaner. The,  
Glen-Almain, or the Narrow Glen,  
■ — of Loch-Etive. Composed in 
the,  
Gold and Silver Fishes in a Vase,  
■ — Liberty ; Sequel to the above,  
Goody Blake and Harry Gill,  
Gordale,  
Grace Darling,  
Grasmere. Inscription in the Island 
of,  
— Lake,  
— Vale of; Departure from 
the,  
Grave-stone in Worcester Cathedral, 
 
Greenock,  
Green Linnet. The,  
Greta. To the River,  
Guilt and Sorrow, or Incidents upon 
Salisbury Plain,  
Gunpowder Plot,  

H. C. To ; Six years old,  
Hambleton-Hills. After a Journey 
across the,  
Hart-leap Well,  
Harts-horn Tree, near Penrith,  
Haunted Tree. The,  
Haydon. To B. R.,  
— To ; On seeing his Picture 
of Napoleon, &c,  
Henry VIII. Recollection of the 
Portrait of, &c,  
Her Eyes are Wild,  
Hermitage. Inscription near the 
Spring of the,  
Hermit's Cell. Inscription, &c,  
Highland Broach. The,  
— Girl. To a,  
— Hut,  
Hint from the Mountains,  
Hints for the Fancy,  
Hoffer,  
Hogg, James. Upon the Death of,  
Horn of Egremont Castle. The,  
Howard. Monument to Mrs.,  
— Suggested by the fore- 
going,  
Humanity,  
Hymn for the Boatmen at Heidelberg, 
 

INDEX TO THE POEMS. 

 

Idiot Boy. The,  
Idle Shepherd-boys. The,  
Illustration ; The Jung-Frau, &c,  
Imagination. Poems of the,  
— and Taste, how Im- 
paired and Kestored,  
Imaginative Kegrets,  
Incident at Bruges,  
Indignation of a Spaniard,  
Infant M. M. The,  
Influence Abused,  
— of Natural Objects,  
Influences. Other (Eccles. Sonnets), 
 
Inglewood Forest. "View from, &c, 
 
Inscription at the request of Sir 
George Beaumont,  
— for a Monument in Cros- 
thwaite Church,  
Inscriptions,  
Intimations of Immortality ; Ode,  
Interdict. An,  
Introduction (Eccles. Sonnets),  
— (Prelude),  
Invocation to the Earth,  
Iona,  
— The Black Stones of,  
Isle of Man (various poems),  
— At Bala-Sala,  
Italian Itinerant and the Swiss Goat- 
herd,  
Italy. After leaving,  

Jewish Family. A,  
Joanna. To,  
Journey Renewed,  

Kendal and "Windermere Railway. 
On the projected,  
Kilchurn Castle. Address to,  
King of Sweden. The,  
King's College Chapel, Cambridge,    
— The same; continued,  
Kitten and Falling Leaves. The,  

Labourers' Noon-day Hymn,  
Lady. To a, upon Drawings she had 
made of Flowers in Madeira,  
Lady E. B. and the Hon. Miss P. To 
the,  
Lake of Brientz. Scene on the,  
— Thun. The Outlet of the,  
Lamb. Charles ; After the Death of, 
 
Lament of Mary, Queen of Scots,  
Lancaster Castle. Suggested by the 
View of,  
Langdale. Epitaph in the Chapel- 
yard of,  
Laodamia,  
Last of the Flock. The,  
Last Supper. The ; by Leonardo da 
Vinci, at Milan,  
Latimer and Ridley,  
Latitudinarianism,  
Laud,  
Lauterbrunnen. The Staub-bach of, 
 

Liberty,  
Liberty and Order. Sonnets to,  
Liturgy. The,  
Lombardy. In,  
London . "Written in Sept.    ,    
Longest Day. The,  
Long Meg and her Daughters. The 
Monument called,  
Lonsdale, Countess of. "Written in 
the Album of the,  
Londsdale. To the Earl of,  
— To William, Earl of,  
Louisa. To ; after accompanying her 
on a Mountain Excursion,  
Lowther,  
Lowther. To the Lady Mary,  
Love lies bleeding,  
— companion to the above,  
Loving and Liking,  
Lucy Gray, or Solitude,  
Lycoris. Ode to,  
— To the same,  

M. H. To,  
" Macpherson's Ossian." In a blank 
leaf of,  
Malham Cove,  
Manse in Scotland. On the sight of 
a,  
March. "Written in ; at the foot of 
Brother's "Water,  
Marriage Ceremony. The,  
— of a Friend. On the Eve 
of the,  
Mary, Queen of Scots,  
— ' —  
Maternal Grief,  
Matron of Jedborough and her Hus- 
band,  
Matthew,  
May. To,  
May Morning. At Rydal, on,  
— ■ — Ode, composedon, 
— — On a,  
Memorial ; Lake of Thun,  
Memory,  
— of Raisley Calvert. To the, 
 
Men of Kent. To the,  
Michael ; A Pastoral Poem,  
Michael Angelo. From the Italian, 
of,  
— — To the Supreme 
Being,  
Miscellaneous Poems,  
— Sonnets,  
Missions and Travels,  
Monasteries. Dissolution of the,  
— Same subject,  
Monastery of Old Bangor,  
Monastic Power. Abuse of,  
— Voluptuousness,  
Monks and Schoolmen,  
Moon. To the ; Cumberland,  
— To the; Rydal,  
Morning Exercise. A,  
Mother's Keturn. The,  
Mutability,  

Naming of Places. Poems on the, ( 
Namur and Liege. Between,  

National Independence and Liberty ; 
Poems to,  
Needlecase in the form of a Harp,  
New Churches,  
— Church-yard,  
Night Piece. A,  
Night Thought. A,  
Norman Boy. The,  
— Conquest. The,  
Nunnery,  
Nun's Well, Brigham,  
Nutting,  

Oak and the Broom. The ; A Pas- 
toral,  
Oak of Guernica. The,  
Obligations of Civil, to Religious, 
Liberty,  
Ode,  
— ,  
— ,  
— January,  
— to Duty,  
— to Lycnris,  
Old Abbeys,  
— Age. Poems referring to,  
— Cumberland Beggar. The,  
Open Prospect,  
Our Lady of the Snow,  
Oxford, May , ,  
— ■ — (another poem),  

Painter. To a,  
— — Same subject,  
Papal Abuses,  
Papal Dominion,  
Parrot and the Wren. The,  
Parsonage. The,  
— A, in Oxfordshire,  
Pass of Killicranky,  
Pass of Kirkstone,  
Pastor. The,  
Pastoral Character,  
Patriotic Sympathies,  
Paulinus,  
Peele Castle, in a Storm, &c,  
Pennsylvanians. To the,  
Persecution,  
Personal Talk,  
Persuasion,  
Peter Bell; A Tale,  
Pet Lamb. The,  
Pilgrim Fathers. The,  
Pilgrim's Dream. The,  
Pillar of Trajan. The,  
Place of Burial. A ; in Scotland,  
Places of Worship,  
Plain of Donnerdale. The,  
Planet Venus. To the,  
— (another poem),  
Plea for Authors. A,  
■ — the Historian,  
Poet and the caged Turtledove. The, 
 
Poet's Dream. The,  
— Epitaph. A,  
Point at Issue. The,  
Poor Robin (Wild Geranium),  
Popery. Revival of,  
Power of Music,  
— Sound. On the,  

 

INDEX TO THE POEMS. 

Prelude. The,  
— to the Vol." Poems chiefly 
of Early and Late Years,"  
Presentiments,  
Primitive Saxon Clergy,  
Prophecy. A,  
Processions in the Vale of Chamouny, 
 
Primrose of the Rock. The,  
Prioress' Tale. The,  
Punishment of Death. Sonnets upon 
the,.  

Rainbow in the Sky,  
" Ranz des Vaches." On hearing the, 
 
Recovery,  
Redbreast. The,  
Redbreast chasing the Butterfly. The, 
 
Reflections,  
Reformation. General View of the 
Troubles of the,  
Reformers. Eminent,  
— The same subject,  
Regrets (Eccles. Sonnets),  
Remembrance of Collins,  
Repentance. A Pastoral Ballad,  
Reproof,  
| Residence at Cambridge,  
— in London,  
— in France,  
Resolution and Independence,  
' Rest and be Thankful ;' Glencroe,  
Resting-Place. The,  
Restoration. Prom the, &c,  
Retired Mariner. By a,  
Retirement,  
Retrospect. — Love of Nature leading 
to Love of Man,  
Return,  
Reverie of Poor Susan,  
Rhine. Banks of the,  
Richard I.,  
Robinson. Henry Crabb; To,  
Rob Roy's Grave,  
Rock. Inscribed upon a,  
Rogers. Samuel, To ; Yarrow Re- 
visited,  
Roman Antiquities, at Bishopstone, 
 
— — at Old Penrith, 
 
Rome. At,  
— (another poem),  
Roslin Chapel. In; during a Storm,  
Rotha Q . To,  
Ruins of a Castle, in N. Wales,  
Rural Architecture,  
— Ceremony,  
— Illusions,  
Russian Fugitive. The,  
Ruth,  
Rydal. At ; on May Morning,  
— In the Woods at,  
Upon one of the Island^ of,  
Rydal Mere. By the Side of,  

Sacheverel,  
Sacrament,  
Sailor's Mother. The,  

Saints,  
St. Bees' Head. Off,  
— Catherine of Ledbury,  
— Herbert's Island,  
San Salvador. Church of,  
Saxon Conquest,  
— Monasteries, &c,  
Schwytz. The Town of,  
Scott. Sir Walter. On the Depar- 
ture of, &c,  
Scottish Covenanters,  
Sea-shore. By the,  
Sea-side. By the,  
Seathwaite Chapel,  
Seclusion,  
Sentiment and Reflection. Poems of, 
 
Seven Sisters. The,  
Sexton. To a,  
S. H. To (Sonnet),  
Sheep-washing,  
Siege of Vienna, raised by John 
Sobieski,  
Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman,  
Simplon Pass. The,  
Sister. To my,  
Sky-lark. To a,  
— (another poem),  
Sky Prospect. Plain of France,  
Sleep. To,  
Snow-drop. To a,  
Solitary. The,  
Solitary Reaper. The,  
Somnambulist. The,  
Sonnet, composed after reading a 
Newspaper of the day,  
Sonnets, &c. (distinguished by dates 
only) : — 
— June, ,  
— November,  
— November, ,  
— November, ,  
— November, ,  
— October, ,  
— September, ,  
— September, ,  
— September, ,  
— September, ,  
Sound of Mull. In the,  
Spade of a Friend. To the,  
Spanish Guerillas,  
Sparrow's Nest, The,  
Spinning Wheel. Song for the,  
Spirit of Paradise,  
Sponsors,  
Stanzas. Written in my pocket copy 
of Thomson's " Castle of Indo- 
lence,"  
Star and the Glow-worm. The,  
Star-gazers,  
Steam-boats, Viaducts, and Railways, 
 
Stepping-Stones. The,  
 — Same subject,  
Stepping Westward,  
Stone. F. Lines suggested by a 
Portrait from the Pencil of,  
— The foregoing subject re- 
sumed,  
Storm. Composed during a,  
Stray Pleasures,  
Struggle of the Britons,  
Summer Vacation,  
Switzerland. On the Subjugation of, 
 

Tables Turned. The,  
Tell. Tower of, at Altorf,  
Temptations from Roman Refine- 
ments,  
Thanksgiving after Childbirth,  
" The Complete Angler." Upon a 
blank leaf in,  
There was a Boy,  
Thorn. The,  
Thought on the Seasons,  
I Thrasymene. Near the Lake of,  
— Near the same Lake, 
 
Three Cottage-Girls. The,  
To ■. In her seventieth year,  
To . (Miscell. Sonnets),  
To . On her first ascent of Hel- 
vellyn,  
To . (Poems founded on the 
Affections),  
To . (The same),  
To . (The same),  
To . Upon the Birth of her 
First-born Child,  
— Sequel to the foregoing,  
Torrent at the Devil's Bridge. To 
the,  
Tour among the Alps,  
— on the Continent,  
— in Italy,  
— in Scotland,  
— in the Summer of ,  
Toussaint L'Ouverture. To,  
Tradition,  
— of Oaker Hill. A,  
Translation of the Bible,  
Transubstantiation,  
Trepidation of the Druids,  
Triad. The,  
Tributary Stream,  
Triumphal Column in Milan, &c,  
Troilus and Cresida,  
Trosachs. The,  
Two April Mornings. The,  
Two Thieves. The,  
Tyndrum, in a Storm. Suggested at, 
 
Tynwald Hill,  
Tyrolese. Feelings of the,  
— Their final Submission, 
 

Uncertainty,  

Valedictory Sonnet,  
Vallombrosa. At,  
Vaudois. The,  
Vaudracour and Julia,  
Venetian Republic. Extinction of 
the,  
Venice. Scene in,  
Vernal Ode,  
Vicar of Kendal. Upon hearing of 
the Death of the,  
Virgin. The,  
Visitation of the Sick,  

Waggoner. The,  
Waldenses,  

INDEX TO THE POEMS. 

 

"Walton's "Book of Lives,"  
Wanderer. The,  
Wandering Jew. Song for the,  
Warning. The,  
Wars of York and Lancaster,  
Waterfall and the Eglantine. The,  
Water-Fowl,  
Waterloo. Occasioned by the Battle 
of,  
— (another poem),  
— After visiting the Field 
of,  
We are Seven,  
Wellington. On a Portrait of the 
Duke of,  

Westall's Caves of Yorkshire,  
Westminster Bridge. Composed 
upon,  
Westmoreland Girl. The,  
White Doe of Bvlstone. The,  
Wicliffe,  
Widow on Windermere Side. The,  
Wild-Duck's Nest. The,  
William III.,  
Wishing-Gate. The,  
Wishing-Gate Destroyed. The,  
Wordsworth. John ; Elegiac Verses 
in Memory of,  
— To the Rev. Christo- 
pher,  

Wordsworth. To the Eev. Dr.,  
Wren's Nest. A.,  
Wye. On the Banks of the,  

Yarrow Visited,  
— Revisited,  
— Unvisited,  
Yew-Tree. Left upon a Seat, &c,  
Y'ew-Trees,  
Young Lady. To a ; Taking long 
Walks, &c,  
Youth. Poems written in,  

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

A barking sound the shepherd hears,  
A Book came forth of late, called Peter Bell,  
A bright-haired company of youthful slaves,  
Abruptly paused the strife ; — the field throughout,  
A dark plume fetch me from yon blasted yew,  
Adieu, Rydalian Laurels ! that have grown,  
Advance — come forth from thy Tyrolean ground,  
Aerial Rock — whose solitary brow,  
A famous man is Robin Hood,  
A flock of sheep that leisurely pass by,  
A genial hearth, a hospitable board,  
Age ! twine thy brows with fresh spring flowers,  
Ah, think how one compelled for life to abide,  
Ah, when the Body, round which in love we clung,  
Ah ! where is Palafox ? Nor tongue nor pen,  
Ah why deceive ourselves '. by no mere fit,  
Aid, glorious Martyrs, from your fields of light,  
Alas ! what boots the long laborious quest,  
A little onward lend thy guiding hand,  
All praise the Likeness by thy skill portrayed,  
A love-lorn Maid, at some far-distant time,  
Ambition — following down this far-famed slope,  
Amid a fertile region green with wood,  
Amid the smoke of cities did you pass,  
Amid this dance of objects sadness steals,  
Among a grave fraternity of Monks,  
Among the dwellers in the silent fields,  
Among the dwellings framed by birds,  
Among the mountains were we nursed, loved Stream,  
A month, sweet Little-ones, is past,  
An age hath been when earth was proud,  
A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags,  
And is it among rude untutored Dales,  
And is this— Yarrow ?—This the Stream,  
And, not in vain embodied to the sight,  
And shall, the Pontiff asks, profaneness flow,  
And what is Penance with her knotted thong,  
And what melodious sounds at times prevail,  
An Orpheus ! an Orpheus ! yes, Faith may grow bold,  
Another year ! — another deadly blow,  
A pen — to register ; a key,  
A Pilgrim, when the summer day,  
A plague on your languages, German and Norse,  
A pleasant music floats along the Mere,  
A Poet .' — He hath put his heart to school,  
A point of life between my Parents' dust,  
Army of Clouds ! ye winged Host in troops,  
A rock there is whose homely front,  
A Roman Master stands on Grecian ground,  
Around a wild and woody hill,  
Arran ! a single crested Teneriffe,  
Art thou a Statist in the van,  

Art thou the bird -whom Man loves best,  
A simple child,  
As faith thus sanctified the warrior's crest,  
As indignation mastered grief, my tongue,  
As leaves are to the tree whereon they grow,  
A slumber did my spirit seal,  
As often as I murmur here,  
As star that shines dependent upon star,  
As the cold aspect of a sunless way,  
A stream, to mingle with your favourite Dee,  
A sudden conflict rises from the swell,  
As, when a storm hath ceased, the birds regain,  
As with the Stream our voyage we pursue,  
At early dawn, or rather when the air,  
A Traveller on the skirt of Sarum's Plain,  
A trouble, not of clouds, or weeping rain,  
At the corner of "Wood Street, when daylight appears,  
Avaunt all specious pliancy of mind,  
A voice, from long-expecting thousands sent,  
A volant Tribe of Bards on earth are found,  
Avon — a precious, an immortal name,  
A weight of awe not easy to be borne,  
A whirl-blast from behind the hill,  
A winged Goddess — clothed in vesture wrought,  
A Youth too certain of his power to wade,  
Bard of the Fleece, whose skilful genius made,  
Beaumont ! it was thy wish that I should rear,  
Before I see another day,  
Before the world had past her time of youth,  
Begone, thou fond presumptuous Elf,  
Beguiled into forgetfulness of care,  
Behold a pupil of the monkish gown,  
Behold her, single in the field,  
Behold, within the leafy shade,  
Beloved Vale ! I said, when I shall con,  
Beneath the concave of an April sky,  
Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed,  
Beneath yon eastern ridge, the craggy bound,  
Be this the chosen site, the virgin sod,  
Between two sister moorland rills,  
Bishops and Priests, blessed are ye, if deep,  
Black Demons hovering o'er his mitred head,  
Blest is this Isle — our native Land,  
Blest Statesman He, whose mind's unselfish will,  
Bold words affirmed, in days when faith was strong,  
Brave Schill ! by death delivered, take thy flight,  
Bright Flower ! whose home is everywhere,  
Broken in fortune, but in mind entire,  
Brook and road,  
Brook ! whose society the Poet seeks,  
Bruges I saw attired with golden light,  

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

But here no cannon thunders to the gale,  
But liberty, and triumphs on the Main,  
But, to outweigh all harm, the sacred Book,  
But, to remote Northumbrian royal Hall,  
But what if One, through grove or flowery mead,  
But whence came they who for the Saviour Lord,  
By a blest Husband guided, Mary came,  
By antique Fancy trimmed— though lowly, bred,  
By Art's bold privilege Warrior and War-horse stand,  
By chain yet stronger must the Soul be tied,  
By Moscow self-devoted to a blaze,  
By playful smiles, (alas, too oft,  
By such examples moved to unbought pains,  
By their floating mill,  
By vain affections unenthralled,  
Call not the royal Swede unfortunate,  
Calm as an under-current, strong to draw,  
Calm is all nature as a resting wheel,  
Calm is the fragrant air, and loth to lose,  
Calvert ! it must not be unheard by them,  
Change me, some god, into that breathing rose,  
Chatsworth ! thy stately mansion, and the pride,  
Child of loud-throated War ! the mountain Stream,  
Child of the clouds ! remote from every taint,  
Clarkson ! it was an obstinate hill to climb,  
Closing the sacred Book which long has fed,  
Clouds, lingering yet, extend in solid bars,  
Coldly we spake. The S;ixons, overpowered,  
Come ye — who, if (which Heaven avert !) the Land,  
Companion ! by whose buoyant Spirit cheered,  
Complacent Fictions were they, yet the same,  
Dark and more dark the shades of evening fell,  
Darkness surrounds us ; seeking, we are lost,  
Days passed — and Monte Calvo would not clear,  
Days undefiled by luxury or sloth,  
Dear be the Church, that, watching o'er the needs,  
Dear Child of Nature, let them rail,  
Dear fellow-travellers ! think not that the Muse,  
Dear native regions, I foretel,  
Dear Reliques ! from a pit of vilest mould,  
Dear to the Loves, and to the Graces vowed,  
Deep is the lamentation ! not alone,  
Degenerate Douglas ! oh, the unworthy Lord,  
Departed Child ! I could forget thee once,  
Departing summer hath assumed,  
Deplorable his lot who tills the ground,  
Desire we past illusions to recal,  
Desponding Father ! mark this altered bough,  
Despond who will —  heard a voice exclaim,  
Destined to war from very infanoy,  
Did pangs of grief for lenient time too keen,  
Dishonoured Rock and Ruin ! that, by law,  
Dogmatic Teachers, of the snow-white fur,  
Doomed as we are our native dust,  
Doubling and doubling with laborious walk,  
Down a swift Stream, thus far, a bold design,  
Dread hour ! when, upheaved by war's sulphurous blast,  
Driven in by Autumn's sharpening air,  
Earth has not anything to show more fair,  
Eden ! till now thy beauty had I viewed,  
Emperors and Kings, how oft have temples rung,  
England ! the time is come when thou shouldst wean,  
Enlightened Teacher, gladly from thy hand,  
Enough ! for see, with dim association,  

Enough of climbing toil .'—Ambition treads,  
Enough of garlands, of the Arcadian crook,  
Enough of rose-bud lips and eyes,  
Ere the Brothers through the gateway,  
Ere with cold beads of midnight dew,  
Ere yet our course was graced with social trees,  
Eternal Lord ! eased of a cumbrous load,  
Ethereal minstrel ! pilgrim of the sky,  
Even as a dragon's eye that feels the stress,  
Even so for me a Vision sanctified,  
Even such the contrast that, where'er we move,  
Even while I speak, the sacred roofs of France,  
Excuse is needless when with love sincere,  
Failing impartial measure to dispense,  
Fair Ellen Irwin, when she sate,  
Fair Lady ! can I sing of flowers,  
Fair Land ! Thee all men greet with joy ; how few,  
Fair Prime of life ! were it enough to gild,  
Fair Star of evening, Slpendour of the west,  
Fallen, and diffused into a shapeless heap,  
Fame tells of groves — from England far away,  
Fancy, who leads the pastimes of the glad,  
Farewell, thou little nook of mountain-ground,  
Far from my dearest friend, 'tis mine to rove,  
Far from our home by Grasmere's quiet lake,  
Father ! to God himself we cannot give,  
Fear hath a hundred eyes, that all agree,  
Feel for the wrongs to universal ken,  
Festivals have I seen that were not names,  
Fit retribution, by the moral code,  
Five years have past ; five summers, with the length,  
Flattered with promise of escape,  
Fly, some kind Harbinger, to Grasmere-dale,  
Fond words have oft been spoken to thee, Sleep,  
For action born, existing to be tried,  
Forbear to deem the Chronicler unwise,  
For ever hallowed be this morning fair,  
For gentlest uses, oft-times Nature takes,  
Forgive, illustrious Country ! these deep sighs,  
Forth from a jutting ridge, around whose base, J 
For what contend the wise ? — for nothing less,  
Four fiery steeds impatient of the rein,  
From Bolton's old monastic tower,  
From early youth I ploughed the restless main,  
From false assumption rose, and, fondly hailed,  
From Little down to Least, in due degree,  
From low to high doth dissolution climb,  
From Rite and Ordinance abused they fled,  
From Stirling Castle we had seen,  
From the Baptismal hour, through weal and woe,  
From the dark chambers of dejection freed,  
From the fierce aspect of this River, throwing,  
From the Pier's head, musing, and with increase,  
From this deep chasm, where quivering sunbeams play,  
Frowns are on every Muse's face,  
Furl we the sails, and pass with tardy oars,  
Genius of Raphael .' if thy wings,  
Glad sight ! wherever new with old,  
Glide gently, thus for ever glide,  
Glory to God ! and to the Power who came,  
Go back to antique ages, if thine eyes,  
Go, faithful Portrait ! and where long hath knelt,  
Grant, that by this unsparing hurricane,  
Great men have been among us; hands that penned,  

 

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

Greta, what fearful listening ! when huge stones,  
Grief, thou hast lost an ever-ready friend,  
Grieve for the Man who hither came bereft,  
Had this effulgence disappeared,  
Hail, orient Conqueror of gloomy Night,  
Hail to the fields — with Dwellings sprinkled o er,  
Hail, Twilight, sovereign of one peaceful hour,  
Hail, "Virgin Queen ! o'er many an envious bar,  
Hail, Zaragoza ! If with unwet eye,  
Happy the feeling from the bosom thrown,  
Hard task ! exclaim the undisciplined, to lean,  
Hark ! 'tis the Thrush, undaunted, undeprest,  
Harmonious Powers with Nature work,  
Harp ! couldst thou venture, on thy boldest string,  
Hast thou seen, with flash incessant,  
Hast thou then survived,  
Haydon ! let worthier judges praise the skill,  
Here Man more purely lives, less oft doth fall,  
Here, on our native soil, we breathe once more,  
Here on their knees men swore : the stones were black,  
Here pause : the Poet claims at least this praise,  
Here stood an Oak, that long had borne affixed,  
Here, where, of havoc tired and rash undoing,  
Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,  
Her only pilot the soft breeze, the boat,  
" High bliss is only for a higher state,"  
High deeds, O Germans, are to come from you,  
High in the breathless hall the Minstrel sate,  
High is our calling, Friend ! — Creative Art,  
High on a broad unfertile tract of forest-skirted Down,  
High on her speculative tower,  
His simple truths did Andrew glean,  
Holy and heavenly Spirits as they are,  
Homeward we turn. Isle of Columba's Cell,  
Hope rules a land for ever green,  
Hope smiled when your nativity was cast,  
Hopes, what are they ? — Beads of morning,  
How art thou named ? In search of what strange land,   
How beautiful, when up a lofty height,  
How beautiful your presence, how benign,  
How blest the Maid whose heart — yet free,  
How clear, how keen, how marvellously bright,  
How disappeared he ? Ask the newt and toad,  
How fast the Marian death-list is unrolled,  
How profitless the relics that we cull,  
How richly glows the water's breast,  
How rich that forehead's calm expanse,  
How sad a welcome ! To each voyager,  
How shall I paint thee ?— Be this naked stone,  
How soon— alas! did Man, created pure,  
How sweet it is, when mother Fancy rocks,  
Humanity, delighting to behold,  
Hunger, and sultry heat, and nipping blast,  
I am not One who much or oft delight,  
I come, ye little noisy Crew,  
I dropped my pen ; and listened to the Wind,  
Jesu ! bless our slender Boat,  
If from the public way you turn your steps,  
If Life were slumber on a bed of down,  
If Nature, for a favourite child,  
If there be Prophets on whose spirits rest,  
If these brief Records, by the Muse's art,  
If the whole weight of what we think and feel,  
If this great world of joy and pain,  

If thou in the dear love of some one Friend,  
If to Tradition faith be due,  
If with old love of you, dear Hills ! I share,  
I grieved for Buonaparte, with a vain,  
I have a boy of five years old,  
I heard (alas ! 'twas only in a dream),  
I heard a thousand blended notes,  
I listen— but no faculty of mine,  
Imagination— ne'er before content,  
I marvel how Nature could ever find space,  
I met Louisa in the shade,  
Immured in Bothwell's towers, at times the Brave,  
In Bruges town is many a street,  
In desultory walk through orchard grounds,  
In distant countries have I been,  
In due observance of an ancient rite,  
Inland, within a hollow vale, I stood,  
Inmate of a mountain-dwelling,  
In my mind's eye a Temple, like a cloud,  
Intent on gathering wool from hedge and brake,  
In these fair vales hath many a tree,  
In the sweet shire of Cardigan,  
In this still place, remote from men,  
In trellised shed with clustering roses gay,  
Intrepid sons of Albion ! not by you,  
In youth from rock to rock I went,  
Jones ! as from Calais southward you and I,  
I rose while yet the cattle, heat-opprest,  
I saw a mother's eye intensely bent,  
I saw an aged Beggar in my walk,  
I saw far off the dark top of a Pine,  
I saw the figure of a lovely Maid,  
Is Death, when evil against good has fought,  
I shiver, Spirit fierce and bold,  
Is it a reed that 's shaken by the wind,  
Is then no nook of English ground secure,  
Is then the final page before me spread,  
Is there a power that can sustain and cheer,  
Is this, ye Gods, the Capitolian Hill,  
I thought of Thee, my partner and my guide,  
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free,  
It is no Spirit who from heaven hath flown,  
It is not to be thought of that the Flood,  
It is the first mild day of March,  
I travelled among unknown men,  
It seems a day,   
It was a moral end for which they fought,  
It was an April morning : fresh and clear,  
I 've watch'd you now a short half-hour,  
Just as those final words were penned, the sun broke out 
in power,  
I wandered lonely as a cloud,  
I was thy Neighbour once, thou rugged Pile,  
I watch, and long have watch'd, with calm regret,  
I, who accompanied with faithful pace,  
Keep for the young the impassioned smile,  
Lady ! a Pen (perhaps with thy regard,  
Lady ! I rifled a Parnassian Cave,  
Lady ! the songs of Spring were in the grove,  
Lament ! for Dioclesian's fiery sword,  
Lance, shield, and sword relinquished— at his side,  
Last night, without a voice, that Vision spake,  
Let other bards of angels sing,  
Let thy wheel-barrow alone,  



INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

 

Let us quit the leafy arbour,  
Lie here, without a record of thy worth,  
Life with yon Lambs, like day, is just begun,  
Like a shipwreck'd Sailor tost,  
List, the winds of March are blowing,  
List — 'twas the Cuckoo. — O with what delight,  
List, ye who pass by Lyulph's Tower,  
Lo ! in the burning west, the craggy nape,  
Lone Flower hemmed in with snows, and white as they, ? 
Long favoured England ! be not thou reisled,  
Long has the dew been dried on tree and lawn,  
Lonsdale ! it were unworthy of a Guest,  
Look at the fate of summer flowers,  
Look now on that Adventurer who hath paid,  
Lord of the vale ! astounding Flood,  
Loud is the Vale ! the Voice is up,  
Loving she is, and tractable, though wild,  
Lo ! where she stands fixed in a saint-like trance,  
Lo ! where the Moon along the sky,  
Lowther ! in thy majestic Pile are seen,  
Lulled by the sound of pastoral bells,  
Lyre ! though such power do in thy magic live,  
Man's life is like a Sparrow, mighty King,  
Mark how the feathered tenants of the flood,  
Mark the concentred hazels that enclose,  
Meek Virgin Mother, more benign,  
Men of the Western World ! in Fate's dark book,  
Men, who have ceased to reverence, soon defy,  
Mercy and Love have met thee on thy road, !  
Methinksthat I could trip o'er heaviest soil,  
Methinks that to some vacant hermitage,  
Methinks 'twere no unprecedented feat,  
Methought I saw the footsteps of a throne,  
'Mid crowded obelisks and urns,  
Mid-noon is past ; — upon the sultry mead,  
Milton ! thou shouldst be living at this hour,  
Mine ear has rung, my spirit sunk subdued,  
Miserrimus ! and neither name nor date,  
Monastic domes ! following my downward way,  
Most sweet it is with unuplif ted eyes,  
Mother ! whose virgin bosom was uncrost,  
Motions and Means, on land and sea at war,  
My frame hath often trembled with delight,  
My heart leaps up when I behold,  
Nay, Traveller ! rest. This lonely Yew-tree stands,  
Near Anio's stream, I spied a gentle Dove,  
Never enlivened with the liveliest ray,  
Next morning Troilus began to clear,  
No fiction was it of the antique age,  
No more : the end is sudden and abrupt,  
No mortal object did these eyes behold,  
No record tells of lance opposed to lance,  
Nor scorn the aid which Fancy oft doth lend,  
Nor shall the eternal roll of praise reject,  
Nor wants the cause the panic-striking aid,  
Not a breath of air,  
Not envying Latian shades— if yet they throw,  
Not hurled precipitous from steep to steep,  
Not in the lucid intervals of life,  
Not in the mines beyond the western main,  
Not, like his great Compeers, indignantly,  
Not Love, not War, nor the tumultuous swell,  
Not 'mid the world's vain objects that enslave,  
Not sedentary all : there are who roam  

Not seldom, clad in radiant vest,  
Not so that Pair whose youthful spirits dance.  
Not the whole warbling grove in concert heard,  
Not to the clouds, not to the cliff, he flew,  
Not to the object specially designed,  
Not utterly unworthy to endure,  
Not without heavy grief of heart did He,  
Now that all hearts are glad, all faces bright,  
Now that the farewell tear is dried,  
Now we are tired of boisterous joy,  
Now when the primrose makes a splendid show, 
Nuns fret not at their convent's narrow room,  
Oak of Guernica ! Tree of holier power,  
O blithe New-comer ! I have heard,  
O dearer far than light and life are dear,  
O'er the wide earth, on mountain and on plain,  
O'erweening Statesmen have full long relied,  
O Flower of all that springs from gentle blood,  
Of mortal parents is the Hero born,  
O for a dirge ! But why complain,  
O, for a kindling touch from that pure flame,  
O for the help of Angels to complete,  
O Friend ! I know not which way I must look,  
Oft have I caught, upon a fitful breeze,  
Oft have I seen, ere Time had ploughed my cheek,  
Oft I had heard of Lucy Gray,  
Oft is the medal faithful to its trust,  
O gentle Sleep ! do they belong to thee,  
O happy time of youthful lovers (thus,  
Oh Life ! without thy chequered scene,  
Oh ! pleasant exercise of hope and joy,  
Oh what a Wreck ! how changed in mien and speech,  
Oh ! what 's the matter ? what 's the matter,  
O Lord, our Lord ! how wondrously (quoth she),  
O mountain Stream ! the Shepherd and his Cot,  
Once did She hold the gorgeous east in fee,  
Once I could hail (howe'er serene the sky),  
Once in a lonely hamlet I sojourned,  
Once more the Church is seized with sudden fear,  
Once on the top of Tynwald's formal mound,  
One might believe that natural miseries,  
One morning (raw it was and wet,  
One who was suffering tumult in his soul,  
On his morning rounds the Master,  
O Nightingale ! thou surely art,  
On, loitering Muse — the swift Stream chides us — on,  
O now that the genius of Bewick were mine,  
On to Iona ! — What can she afford,  
Open your gates, ye everlasting Piles,  
O there is blessing in this gentle breeze,  
O thou who movest onward with a mind,  
O thou ! whose fancies from afar are brought,  
Our bodily life, some plead, that life the shrine,  
Our walk was far among the ancient trees,  
Outstretching flame- ward his upbraided hand,  
Pansies, lilies, kingcups, daisies,  
Part fenced by man, part by a rugged steep,  
Pastor and Patriot ! — at whose bidding rise,  
Patriots informed with Apostolic light,  
Pause, courteous Spirit ! — Balbi supplicates,  
Pause, Traveller ! whosoe'er thou be,  
Pelion and Ossa flourish side by side,  
People ! your chains are severing link by link,  
Perhaps some needful service of the State,  

 

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

Pleasures newly found are sweet,  
Portentous change when History can appear,  
Praised be the Art whose subtle power could stay,  
Praised be the Rivers, from their mountain springs,  
Prejudged by foes determined not to spare,  
Presentiments ! they judge not right,  
Prompt transformation works the novel Lore,  
Proud were ye, Mountains, when, in times of old,  
Pure element of waters ! wheresoe'er,  
Queen of the Stars !— so gentle, so benign, - 
Ranging the heights of Scawfell or Black-comb,  
Rapt above earth by power of one fair face,  
Realms quake by turns : proud Arbitress of grace,  
Record we too, with just and faithful pen,  
Redoubted King, of courage leonine,  
Reluctant call it was ; the rite delayed,  
Rest, rest, perturbed Earth,  
Return, Content ! for fondly I pursued,  
Rise ! — they have risen : of brave Aneurin ask,  
Rotha, my Spiritual Child ! this head was grey,  
Rude is this Edifice, and Thou hast seen,  
Sacred Religion ! Mother of form and fear,  
Sad thoughts, avaunt ! — partake we their blithe cheer,  
Said Secrecy to Cowardice and Fraud,  
Say, what is Honour ? — >'Tis the finest sense,  
Say, ye far-travelled clouds, far-seeing hills,  
Scattering, like birds escaped the fowler's net,  
Scorn not the Sonnet ; Critic, you have frowned,  
Screams round the Arch-druid's brow the sea-mew — 
Seek who will delight in fable,  [white,  
See the Condemned alone within his cell,  
See what gay wild flowers deck this earth-built Cot,  
See, where his difficult way that Old Man wins,  
Serene, and fitted to embrace,  
Serving no haughty Muse, my hands have here,  
Seven Daughters had Lord Archibald,  
Shame on this faithless heart ! that could allow,  
She dwelt among the untrodden ways,  
She had a tall man's height or more,  
She was a Phantom of delight,  
Show me the noblest Youth of present time,  
Shout, for a mighty Victory is won,  
Shun not this Rite, neglected, yea abhorred,  
Since risen from ocean, ocean to defy,  
Six months to six years added he remained,  
Six thousand veterans practised in war's game,  
Small service is true service while it lasts,  
Smile of the Moon ! — for so I name,  
So fair, so sweet, withal so sensitive,  
Soft as a cloud is yon blue Ridge — the Mere,  
Sole listener, Duddon ! to the breeze that played,  
Spade ! with which Wilkinson hath tilled his lands,  
Stay, bold Adventurer ; rest awhile thy limbs,  
Stay, little cheerful Robin ! stay,  
Stay near me — do not take thy flight,  
Stern Daughter of the Voice of God,  
Strange fits of passion have I known,  
Stranger ! this hillock of mis-shapen stones,  
Stretched on the dying Mother's lap, lies dead,  
Such age how beautiful ! O Lady bright,  
Such fruitless questions may not long beguile,  
Surprised by joy— impatient as the Wind,  
Sweet Flower ! belike one day to have,  

Sweet Highland Girl, a very shower,  
Sweet is the holiness of Youth — so felt,  
Swiftly turn the murmuring wheel,  
Sylph was it ? or a Bird more bright,  
Take, cradled Nursling of the mountain, take,  
Tax not the royal Saint with vain expense,  
Tell me, ye Zephyrs ! that unfold,  
Tenderly do we feel by Nature's law,  
Thanks for the lessons of this Spot — fit school,  
That happy gleam of vernal eyes,  
That heresies should strike (if truth be scanned,  
That is work of waste and ruin,  
That way look, my Infant, lo,  
The Baptist might have been ordained to cry,  
The Bard — whose soul is meek as dawning day,  
The captive Bird was gone ;— to cliff or moor,  
The cattle crowding round this beverage clear,  
The cock is crowing,  
The Crescent-moon, the Star of Love,  
The Danish Conqueror, on his royal chair,  
The days are cold, the nights are long,  
The dew was falling fast, the stars began to blink,  
The embowering rose, the acacia, and the pine,  
The encircling ground in native turf arrayed,  
The fairest, brightest hues of ether fade,  
The feudal Keep, the bastions of Cohorn,  
The fields which with covetous spirit we sold,  
The floods are roused, and will not soon be weary,  
The forest huge of ancient Caledon,  
The formal World relaxes her cold chain,  
The gallant Youth, who may have gained,  
The gentlest Poet, with free thoughts endowed,  
The gentlest Shade that walked Elysian plains,  
The God of Love — ah, benedicite !  
The imperial Consort of the Fairy-king,  
The imperial Stature, the colossal stride,  
The Kirk of Ulpha to the Pilgrim's eye,  
The Knight had ridden down from Wensley Moor,  
The Land we from our fathers had in trust,  
The leaves that rustled on this oak-crowned hill,  
The linnet's warble, sinking towards a close,  
The little hedge-row birds,  
The lovely Nun (submissive, but more meek,  
The Lovers took within this ancient grove,  
The martial courage of a day is vain,  
The massy Ways, carried across these heights,  
The Minstrels played their Christmas tune,  
The most alluring clouds that mount the sky,  
The old inventive Poets, had they seen,  
The oppression of the tumult — wrath and scorn, ) 
The peace which others seek they find,  
The pibroch's note, discountenanced or mute,  
The post-boy drove with fierce career,  
The Power of Armies is a visible thing,  
The prayers I make will then be sweet indeed,  
There are no colours in the fairest sky,  
There is a bondage worse, far worse, to bear,  
There is a change— and I am poor,  
There is a Flower, the lesser Celandine,  
There is a little unpretending Rill,  
There is an Eminence, — of these our hills,  
There is a pleasure in poetic pains,  
There is a Thorn — it looks so old,  
There is a Yew-tree, pride of Lorton Vale,  
There never breathed a man who, when his life,  

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

 

There ! said a Stripling, pointing with meet pride,  
There's George Fisher, Charles Fleming, and Reginald 
Shore,  
There 's more in words than I can teach,  
There's not a nook within this solemn Pass,  
There 'ssomething in a flying horse,  
There was a Boy ; ye knew him well, ye cliffs,  
There was a roaring in the wind all night,  
There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,  
The Roman Consul doomed his sons to die,  
The Sabbath bells renew the inviting peal,  
The saintly Youth has ceased to rule, discrowned,  
These times strike monied worldlings with dismay,  
These Tourists, Heaven preserve us ! needs must live,  
The Sheep-boy whistled loud, and lo !  
The Shepherd, looking eastward, softly said,  
The sky is overcast,  
The soaring lark is blest as proud,  
The Spirit of Antiquity — enshrined,  
TheBtars are mansions built by Nature's hand,  
The struggling Rill insensibly is grown,  
The sun has long been set,  
The sun is couched, the sea-fowl gone to rest,  
The Sun, that seemed so mildly to retire,  
The sylvan slopes with corn-clad fields,  
The tears of man in various measure gush,  
The Troop will be impatient ; let us hie,  
Theturbaned Race are poured in thickening swarms,  
The valley rings with mirth and joy,  
The Vested Priest before the Altar stands,  
The Virgin Mountain, wearing like a Queen,  
The Voice of Song from distant lands shall call,  
The wind is now thy organist ;— a clank,  
The woman-hearted Confessor prepares,  
The world forsaken, all its busy cares,  
The world is too much with us ; late and soon,  
They called Thee Merry England, in old time,  
They dreamt not of a perishable home,  
The Young-ones gathered in from hill and dale,  
They seek, are sought ; to daily battle led,  
They — who have seen the noble Roman's scorn,  
This Height a ministering Angel might select,  
This Land of Rainbows (spanning glens whose walls,  
This Lawn, a carpet all alive,  
This Spot— at once unfolding sight so fair,  
Those breathing Tokens of your kind regard,  
Those had given earliest notice, as the lark,  
Those old credulities, to nature dear,  
Those silver clouds collected round the sun,  
Those words were uttered as in pensive mood,  
Though I beheld at first with blank surprise,  
Though joy attend Thee orient at the birth,  
Though many suns have risen and set,  
Though narrow be that old Man's cares, and near,  
Tho' searching damps and many an envious flaw,  
Though the bold wings of Poesy affect,  
Though the torrents from their fountains,  
Though to give timely warning and deter,  
Thou look'st upon me, and dost fondly think,  
Thou sacred Pile ! whose turrets rise,  
Threats come which no submission may assuage,  
Three years she grew in sun and shower,  
Through shattered galleries, 'mid roofless halls,  
Thus all things lead to Charity, secured,  
Thus is the storm abated by the craft,  
Thy functions are ethereal,  

'Tis eight o'clock,— a clear March night,  
'Tis gone— with old belief and dream,  
'Tis He whose yester-evening's high disdain,  
'Tis not for the unfeeling, the falsely refined,  
'Tis said, fantastic ocean doth enfold,  
'Tis said, that some have died for love,  
'Tis said that to the brow of yon fair hill,  
'Tis spent— this burning day of June,   
To a good Man of most dear memory,  
To appease the Gods ; or public thanks to yield,  
To barren heath, bleak moor, and quaking fen,  
To kneeling Worshippers, no earthly floor,  
Too frail to keep the lofty vow,  
To public notice, with reluctance strong,  
Toussaint, the most unhappy man of men,  
Tradition, be thou mute ! Oblivion, throw,  
Tranquillity ! the sovereign aim wert thou,  
Troubled long with warring notions,  
True is it that Ambrosio Salinero,  
'Twas Summer and the sun had mounted high,  
Two Voices are there ; one is of the sea,  
Vallombrosa ! I longed in thy shadiest wood,  
Vallombrosa— I longed in thy shadiest wood,  
Vanguard of Liberty, ye men of Kent,  
Under the shadow of a stately Pile,  
Ungrateful Country, if thou e'er forget,  
Unless to Peter's Chair the viewless wind,  
Unquiet childhood here by special grace,  
Untouched through all severity of cold,  
Up, Timothy, up with your staff and away,  
Up to the throne of God is borne,  
Up ! up ! my Friend, and quit your books,  
Up with me ! up with me into the clouds,  
Urged by Ambition, who with subtlest skill,  
Uttered by whom, or how inspired— designed,  
Wait, prithee, wait ! this answer Lesbia threw,  
Wanderer ! that stoop'st so low, and com'st so near,  
Wansfell ! this Household has a favoured lot,  
Ward of the Law .'—dread Shadow of a King,  
Was it to disenchant, and to undo,  
Was the aim frustrated by force or guile,  
Watch, and be firm ! for, soul-subduing vice,  
Weak is the will of Man, his judgment blind,  
We can endure that He should waste our lands,  
Weep not, beloved Friends ! nor let the air,  
We had a female Passenger who came,  
We have not passed into a doleful City,  
Well have yon Railway Labourers to this ground,  
Wellmay'st thou halt— and gaze with brightening eye,  
Well sang the Bard who called the grave, in strains,  
Well worthy to be magnified are they,  
Were there, below, a spot of holy ground,  
We saw, but Burely, in the motley crowd,  
We talked with open heart, and tongue,  
We walked along, while bright and red,  
What aim had they, the Pair of Monks, in size,  
What aspect bore the Man who roved or fled,  
What awful perspective ! while from our sight,  
What beast in wilderness or cultured field,  
What beast of chase hath broken from the cover,  
What crowd is this ? what have we here ! we must not 
pass it by,  
What heavenly smiles ! O Lady mine,  

 

INDEX TO THE FIRST LINES. 

What He— who, 'mid the kindred throng,  
What if our numbers barely could defy,  
What is good for a bootless bene,  
What know we of the Blest above,  
What lovelier home could gentle Fancy choose,  
What mischief cleaves to unsubdued regret,  
What need of clamorous bells, or ribands gay,  
What strong allurement draws, what spirit guides,  
What though the Accused, upon his own appeal,  
What though the Italian pencil wrought not here,  
What way does the Wind come ? What way does he go, S!> 
What, you are stepping westward ? — Yea,  
When Alpine Vales threw forth a suppliant cry,  
Whence that low voice? — A whisper from the heart,  
When, far and wide, swift as the beams of morn,  
When first descending from the moorlands,  
When haughty expectations prostrate lie,  
When here with Carthage Rome to conflict came,  
When human touch (as monkish books attest),  
When I have borne in memory what has tamed,  
When In the antique age of bow and spear,  
When, looking on the present face of things,  
When Philoetetes in the Lemnianisle,  
When Ruth was left half desolate,  
When the soft hand of sleep had closed the latch,  
When thy great soul was freed from mortal chains,  
When, to the attractions of the busy world,  
Where are they now, those wanton Boys,  
Where art thou, my beloved Son,  
Where be the noisy followers of the game,  
Where be the temples which, in Britain's Isle,  
Where holy ground begins, unhallowed ends,   
Where lies the Land to which yon Ship must go,  
Where long and deeply hath been fixed the root,  
Where towers are crushed, and unforbidden weeds,  
Where will they stop, those breathing Powers,  
While Anna's peers and early playmates tread,  
While beams of orient light shoot wide and high,  
While flowing rivers yield a blameless sport,  
While from the purpling east departs,  
While Merlin paced the Cornish sands,  
While not a leaf seems faded ; while the fields,  
While poring Antiquarians search the ground,  
While the Poor gather round, till the end of time,  
Who but hails the sight with pleasure,  
Who comes — with rapture greeted, and caressed,  
Who fancied what a pretty sight,  
Who is the happy Warrior ? Who is he,  
Who ponders National events shall find,  

Who rashly strove thy Image to portray,  
Who rises on the banks of Seine,  
Who swerves from innocence, who makes divorce,  
Why art thou silent ! Is thy love a plant,  
Why cast ye back upon the Gallic shore,  
Why, Minstrel, these untuneful murnjurings,  
Why should the Enthusiast, journeying thro' this Isle,  
Why sleeps the future, as a snake enrolled,  
Why stand we gazing on the sparkling Brine,  
Why, William, on that old grey stone,  
Wild Redbreast ! hadst thou at Jemima's lip,  
Wisdom and Spirit of the universe,  
With copious eulogy in prose or rhyme,  
With each recurrence of this glorious morn,  
With how sad steps, O Moon, thou climb'stthe sky,  
Within her gilded cage confined,  
Within our happy Castle there dwelt One,  
Within the mind strong fancies work,  
With little here to do or see,  
With sacrifice before the rising morn,  
With Ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh,  
Woe to the Crown that doth the Cowl obey,  
Woe to you, Prelates ! rioting in ease,  
Woman ! the Power who left his throne on high,  
Wouldst thou be taught, when sleep has taken flight,  
Would that our scrupulous Sires had dared to leave,  
Ye Appenines ! with all your fertile vales,  
Ye brood of conscience— Spectres ! that frequent,  
Ye Lime-trees, ranged before this hallowed Urn,  
Ye sacred Nurseries of blooming Youth,  
Ye shadowy Beings, that have rights and claims,  
Yes ! hope may with my strong desire keep pace,  
Yes, if the intensities of hope and fear,  
Yes, it was the mountain Echo,  
Yes  thou art fair, yet he not moved,  
Yes, though He well may tremble at the sound,  
Ye Storms, resound the praises of your King  
Yet are they here the same unbroken knot,  
Yet many a Novice of the cloistral shade,  
Yet more — round many a Convent's blazing fire,  
Ye, too, must fly before a chasing hand,  
Ye trees ! whose slender roots entwine,  
Yet Truth is keenly sought for, and the wind,  
Yet, yet, Biscayans ! we must meet our Eoes,  
Ye vales and hills whose beauty hither drew,  
You call it, " Love lies bleeding,"— so you may,  
You have heard a Spanish Lady,  
Young England — what is then become of Old,  

